PART 200—UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS, COST PRINCIPLES, AND AUDIT REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL AWARDS

Authority:31 U.S.C. 503; 31 U.S.C. 6101-6106; 31 U.S.C. 6307; 31 U.S.C. 7501-7507.

Source:89 FR 30136, Apr. 22, 2024, unless otherwise noted.

Subpart A—Acronyms and Definitions

Acronyms

§ 200.0 Acronyms.

(a) CAS Cost Accounting Standards

(b) CFR Code of Federal Regulations

(c) F&A Facilities and Administration

(d) FAC Federal Audit Clearinghouse

(e) FAIN Federal Award Identification Number

(f) FAR Federal Acquisition Regulation

(g) FASB Financial Accounting Standards Board

(h) FFATA Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006 or Transparency Act, Public Law 109-282, as amended (See 31 U.S.C. 6101, statutory note)

(i) FOIA Freedom of Information Act

(j) FR Federal Register

(k) GAAP Generally Accepted Accounting Principles

(l) GAGAS Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards

(m) GASB Government Accounting Standards Board

(n) GAO Government Accountability Office

(o) GSA General Services Administration

(p) IBS Institutional Base Salary

(q) IHE Institutions of Higher Education

(r) IRC Internal Revenue Code

(s) ISDEAA Indian Self-Determination and Education and Assistance Act

(t) MTC Modified Total Cost

(u) MTDC Modified Total Direct Cost

(v) NFE Non-Federal Entity

(w) NOFO Notice of Funding Opportunity

(x) OMB Office of Management and Budget

(y) PII Personally Identifiable Information

(z) PMS Payment Management System

(aa) SAM System for Award Management (SAM.gov)

(bb) UEI Unique Entity Identifier

(cc) U.S.C. United States Code

(dd) VAT Value Added Tax

§ 200.1 Definitions.

The following is a list of definitions of key terms frequently used in 2 CFR part 200. Definitions found in Federal statutes or regulations that apply to particular programs take precedence over the following definitions. However, where the following definitions implement specific statutory requirements that apply government-wide, such as the Single Audit Act, the following definitions take precedence over Federal regulations. For purposes of this part, the following definitions apply:

Acquisition cost   means the (total) cost of the asset including the cost to ready the asset for its intended use. For example, acquisition cost for equipment means the net invoice price of the equipment, including the cost of any modifications, attachments, accessories, or auxiliary apparatus necessary to make it usable for the purpose for which it is acquired. Acquisition costs for software include those development costs capitalized in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Ancillary charges such as taxes, duty, protective in transit insurance, freight, and installation may be included in or excluded from the acquisition cost in accordance with the recipient's or subrecipient's regular accounting practices.

Advance payment   means a payment that a Federal agency or pass-through entity makes by any appropriate payment mechanism and payment method before the recipient or subrecipient disburses the funds for program purposes.

Allocation   means the process of assigning a cost, or a group of costs, to one or more cost objective(s), in reasonable proportion to the benefit provided or other equitable relationship. The process may entail assigning a cost(s) directly to a final cost objective or through one or more intermediate cost objectives.

Assistance Listings   refer to the publicly available listing of Federal assistance programs managed and administered by the General Services Administration (GSA) at SAM.gov.

Assistance Listing number   means a unique number assigned to identify an Assistance Listing.

Assistance Listing program title   means the title that corresponds to the Assistance Listing number.

Audit finding   means deficiencies which the auditor is required to report in the schedule of findings and questioned costs. (See § 200.516(a))

Auditee   means any non-Federal entity that must be audited under this part. (See § 200.501)

Auditor   means an auditor who is a public accountant or a Federal, State, local government, or Indian Tribe audit organization that meets the general standards specified for external auditors in generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS). The term auditor does not include internal auditors of nonprofit organizations.

Budget   means the financial plan for the Federal award that the Federal agency or pass-through entity approves during the Federal award process or in subsequent amendments to the Federal award. It may include the Federal and non-Federal share or only the Federal share, as determined by the Federal agency or pass-through entity.

Budget period   means the time interval from the start date of a funded portion of an award to the end date of that funded portion, during which recipients and subrecipients are authorized to incur financial obligations of the funds awarded, including any funds carried forward or other revisions pursuant to § 200.308.

Capital assets   means:

(1) Tangible or intangible assets used in operations having a useful life of more than one year which are capitalized in accordance with GAAP. Capital assets include:

(i) Land, buildings (facilities), equipment, and intellectual property (including software), whether acquired by purchase, construction, manufacture, exchange, or through a lease accounted for as financed purchase under Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB) standards or a finance lease under Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) standards; and

(ii) Additions, improvements, modifications, replacements, rearrangements, reinstallations, renovations, or alterations to capital assets that materially increase their value or useful life (not ordinary repairs and maintenance).

(2) For purpose of this part, capital assets do not include intangible right-to-use assets (per GASB) and right-to-use operating lease assets (per FASB). For example, assets capitalized that recognize a lessee's right to control the use of property or equipment for a period of time under a lease contract. See § 200.465.

Capital expenditures   means expenditures to acquire capital assets or expenditures to make additions, improvements, modifications, replacements, rearrangements, reinstallations, renovations, or alterations to capital assets that materially increase their value or useful life.

Central service cost allocation plan   means the documentation identifying, accumulating, and allocating or developing billing rates based on the allowable costs of services provided by a State, local government, or Indian Tribe to its departments and agencies on a centralized basis. The costs of these services may be allocated or billed to users.

Claim   means, depending on the context, either:

(1) A written demand or assertion by one of the parties to a Federal award seeking as a matter of right:

(i) The payment of money;

(ii) The adjustment or interpretation of the terms and conditions of the Federal award; or

(iii) Other relief arising under or relating to a Federal award.

(2) A request for payment not in dispute when submitted.

Class of Federal awards   means a group of Federal awards either awarded under a specific program or group of programs or to a specific type of recipient or group of recipients to which specific provisions or exceptions may apply.

Closeout   means the process by which the Federal agency or pass-through entity determines that all applicable administrative actions and all required work of the Federal award have been completed and takes actions as described in § 200.344.

Cluster of programs   means a grouping of closely related programs that share common compliance requirements. The types of clusters of programs are research and development (R&D), student financial aid (SFA), and other clusters. “Other clusters” are defined by OMB in the compliance supplement or designated by a State for Federal awards the State provides to its subrecipients that meet the definition of a cluster of programs. When designating “other clusters,” a State must identify the Federal awards included in the cluster and advise the subrecipients of compliance requirements applicable to the cluster, consistent with § 200.332. A cluster of programs must be considered one program when determining major programs as described in § 200.518, and with the exception of R&D as described in § 200.501(d), whether a program-specific audit may be elected.

Cognizant agency for audit   means the Federal agency designated to carry out the responsibilities described in § 200.513(a). The cognizant agency for audit is not necessarily the same as the cognizant agency for indirect costs. A list of Federal agency Single Audit contacts can be found on the Federal Audit Clearinghouse (FAC) website.

Cognizant agency for indirect costs   means the Federal agency responsible for reviewing, negotiating and approving cost allocation plans or indirect cost proposals on behalf of all Federal agencies. The cognizant agency for indirect cost is not necessarily the same as the cognizant agency for audit. For assignments of cognizant agencies, see the following:

(1) For Institutions of Higher Education (IHEs): Appendix III, paragraph C.11.

(2) For nonprofit organizations: Appendix IV, paragraph C.2.a.

(3) For State and local governments: Appendix V, paragraph F.1.

(4) For Indian Tribes: Appendix VII, paragraph D.1.

Compliance supplement   means an annually updated authoritative source of information for auditors that identifies existing important compliance requirements that the Federal Government expects to be considered as part of an audit. Auditors use it to understand the Federal program's objectives, procedures, and compliance requirements, as well as audit objectives and suggested audit procedures for determining compliance with the relevant Federal program.

Computing devices   means machines that acquire, store, analyze, process, and publish data and other information electronically, including accessories (or “peripherals”) for printing, transmitting and receiving, or storing electronic information. See also the definitions of supplies and information technology systems in this section.

Contract   means, for the purpose of Federal financial assistance, a legal instrument by which a recipient or subrecipient conducts procurement transactions under a Federal award. For additional information on subrecipient and contractor determinations, see § 200.331. See also the definition of subaward in this section.

Contractor   means an entity that receives a contract.

Continuation funding   means the second or subsequent budget period within an identified period of performance.

Cooperative agreement   means a legal instrument of financial assistance between a Federal agency and a recipient or between a pass-through entity and subrecipient, consistent with 31 U.S.C. 6302-6305:

(1) Is used to enter into a relationship the principal purpose of which is to transfer anything of value to carry out a public purpose authorized by a law of the United States (see 31 U.S.C. 6101(3)); and not to acquire property or services for the Federal Government or pass-through entity's direct benefit or use;

(2) Is distinguished from a grant in that it provides for substantial involvement of the Federal agency or pass-through entity in carrying out the activity contemplated by the Federal award.

(3) The term does not include:

(i) A cooperative research and development agreement as defined in 15 U.S.C. 3710a; or

(ii) An agreement that provides only:

(A) Direct United States Government cash assistance to an individual;

(B) A subsidy;

(C) A loan;

(D) A loan guarantee; or

(E) Insurance.

Corrective action   means action taken by the auditee that:

(1) Corrects identified deficiencies;

(2) Produces recommended improvements; or

(3) Demonstrates that audit findings are either invalid or do not warrant auditee action.

Cost allocation plan   means a central service or public assistance cost allocation plan.

Cost objective   means a program, function, activity, award, organizational subdivision, contract, or work unit for which cost data are desired and for which provision is made to accumulate and measure the cost of processes, products, jobs, and capital projects. A cost objective may be a major function of the recipient or subrecipient, a particular service or project, a Federal award, or an indirect cost activity, as described in subpart E. See also the definitions of final cost objective and intermediate cost objective in this section.

Cost sharing   means the portion of project costs not paid by Federal funds or contributions (unless authorized by Federal statute). This term includes matching, which refers to required levels of cost share that must be provided. See § 200.306.

Disallowed cost   means charges to a Federal award that the Federal agency or pass-through entity determines to be unallowable in accordance with applicable Federal statutes, regulations, the provisions of this part, or the terms and conditions of the Federal award.

Discretionary award   means an award in which the Federal agency, in keeping with specific statutory authority that enables the agency to exercise judgment (“discretion”), selects the recipient or the amount of Federal funding awarded through a competitive process or based on merit of proposals. A discretionary award may be selected on a non-competitive basis, as appropriate.

Equipment   means tangible personal property (including information technology systems) having a useful life of more than one year and a per-unit acquisition cost that equals or exceeds the lesser of the capitalization level established by the recipient or subrecipient for financial statement purposes, or $10,000. See the definitions of capital assets, computing devices, general purpose equipment, information technology systems, special purpose equipment, and supplies in this section.

Expenditures   means charges made by a recipient or subrecipient to a project or program for which a Federal award is received.

(1) The charges may be reported on a cash or accrual basis as long as the methodology is disclosed and consistently applied.

(2) For reports prepared on a cash basis, expenditures are the sum of:

(i) Cash disbursements for direct charges for property and services;

(ii) The amount of indirect expense charged;

(iii) The value of third-party in-kind contributions applied; and

(iv) The amount of cash advance payments and payments made to subrecipients.

(3) For reports prepared on an accrual basis, expenditures are the sum of:

(i) Cash disbursements for direct charges for property and services;

(ii) The amount of indirect expense incurred;

(iii) The value of third-party in-kind contributions applied; and

(iv) The net increase or decrease in the amounts owed by the recipient or subrecipient for:

(A) Goods and other property received;

(B) Services performed by employees, contractors, subrecipients, and other payees; and

(C) Programs for which no current services or performance are required, such as annuities, insurance claims, or other benefit payments.

Federal agency   means an “agency” as defined at 5 U.S.C. 551(1) and further clarified by 5 U.S.C. 552(f). The term generally refers to the agency that provides a Federal award directly to a recipient unless the context indicates otherwise. See also definitions of Federal award and recipient.

Federal Audit Clearinghouse (FAC)   means the repository of record designated by OMB where non-Federal entities must transmit the information required by subpart F.

Federal award   has the meaning, depending on the context, in either paragraph (1) or (2) of this definition:

(1) (i) The Federal financial assistance that a recipient receives directly from a Federal agency or indirectly from a pass-through entity, as described in § 200.101; or

(ii) The cost-reimbursement contract under the Federal Acquisition Regulation that a non-Federal entity receives directly from a Federal agency or indirectly from a pass-through entity, as described in § 200.101.

(2) The instrument setting forth the terms and conditions. The instrument is the grant agreement, cooperative agreement, other agreement for assistance covered in paragraph (2) of the definition of Federal financial assistance in this section, or the cost-reimbursement contract awarded under the Federal Acquisition Regulations.

(3) Federal award does not include other contracts that a Federal agency uses to buy goods or services from a contractor or a contract to operate government-owned, contractor- operated (GOCO) facilities.

(4) See also definitions of Federal financial assistance, grant agreement, and cooperative agreement.

Federal award date   means the date when the authorized official of the Federal agency signed (physically or digitally) the Federal award or when an alternative, consistent with the requirements of 31 U.S.C. 1501, is reached with the recipient.

Federal financial assistance   means:

(1) Assistance that recipients or subrecipients receive or administer in the form of:

(i) Grants;

(ii) Cooperative agreements;

(iii) Non-cash contributions or donations of property (including donated surplus property);

(iv) Direct appropriations;

(v) Food commodities; and

(vi) Other financial assistance (except assistance listed in paragraph (2) of this definition).

(2) For § 200.203 and subpart F of this part, Federal financial assistance also includes assistance that recipients or subrecipients receive or administer in the form of:

(i) Loans;

(ii) Loan Guarantees;

(iii) Interest subsidies; and

(iv) Insurance.

(3) For § 200.216, Federal financial assistance includes assistance that recipients or subrecipients receive or administer in the form of:

(i) Grants;

(ii) Cooperative agreements;

(iii) Loans; and

(iv) Loan Guarantees.

(4) Federal financial assistance does not include amounts received as reimbursement for services rendered to individuals as described in § 200.502(h) and (i).

(5) For part 184 of this title, in addition to the forms of assistance listed in paragraph (1) of this definition, Federal financial assistance also includes assistance that recipients or subrecipients receive or administer in the form of:

(i) Loans; and

(ii) Loan Guarantees.

Federal interest   means, for purposes of § 200.330 or when used in connection with the acquisition or improvement of real property, equipment, or supplies under a Federal award, the dollar amount that is the product of the:

(1) The percentage of Federal participation in the total cost of the real property, equipment, or supplies; and

(2) Current fair market value of the property, improvements, or both, to the extent the costs of acquiring or improving the property were included as project costs.

Federal program   means:

(1) All Federal awards which are assigned a single Assistance Listings Number.

(2) When no Assistance Listings Number is assigned, all Federal awards from the same agency made for the same purpose must be combined and considered one program.

(3) Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2) of this definition, a cluster of programs. The types of clusters of programs are:

(i) Research and development (R&D);

(ii) Student financial aid (SFA); and

(iii) “Other clusters,” as described in the definition of cluster of programs in this section. Federal share means the portion of the Federal award costs paid using Federal funds.

Final cost objective   means a cost objective that has allocated to it both direct and indirect costs and, in the recipient's or subrecipient's accumulation system, is one of the final accumulation points, such as a particular award, internal project, or other direct activity of a recipient or subrecipient. See also the definitions of cost objective and intermediate cost objective in this section.

Financial obligations   means orders placed for property and services, contracts and subawards made, and similar transactions that require payment by a recipient or subrecipient under a Federal award that will result in expenditures by a recipient or subrecipient under a Federal award.

Fixed amount award   means a type of grant or cooperative agreement pursuant to which the Federal agency or pass-through entity provides a specific amount of funding without regard to actual costs incurred under the Federal award. This type of Federal award reduces some of the administrative burden and record-keeping requirements for both the recipient or subrecipient and the Federal agency or pass-through entity. Accountability is based primarily on performance and results. See §§ 200.102(c), 200.101(b), 200.201(b), and 200.333.

For-profit organization   generally means an organization or entity organized for the purpose of earning a profit. The term includes but is not limited to:

(1) An “S corporation” incorporated under subchapter S of the Internal Revenue Code;

(2) A corporation incorporated under another authority;

(3) A partnership;

(4) A limited liability company or partnership; and

(5) A sole proprietorship.

Foreign organization   means an entity that is:

(1) A public or private organization located in a country other than the United States and its territories that is subject to the laws of the country in which it is located, irrespective of the citizenship of project staff or place of performance;

(2) A private nongovernmental organization located in a country other than the United States that solicits and receives cash contributions from the general public;

(3) A charitable organization located in a country other than the United States that is nonprofit and tax-exempt under the laws of the country where it is registered and is not a university, college, accredited degree-granting institution of education, private foundation, hospital, an organization engaged exclusively in research or scientific activities, church, synagogue, mosque or other similar entities organized primarily for religious purposes; or

(4) An organization located in a country other than the United States not recognized as a foreign public entity.

Foreign public entity   means:

(1) A foreign government or foreign governmental entity;

(2) A public international organization, which is an organization entitled to enjoy privileges, exemptions, and immunities as an international organization under the International Organizations Immunities Act (22 U.S.C. 288-288f);

(3) An entity owned (in whole or in part) or controlled by a foreign government; or

(4) Any other entity consisting wholly or partially of one or more foreign governments or foreign governmental entities.

General purpose equipment   means equipment that is not limited to research, medical, scientific, or other technical activities. Examples include office equipment and furnishings, modular offices, telephone networks, information technology equipment and systems, air conditioning equipment, reproduction and printing equipment, and motor vehicles. See also the definitions of equipment and special purpose equipment in this section.

Generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)   has the meaning specified in accounting standards issued by the Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB) and the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB).

Generally accepted government auditing standards (GAGAS),   also known as the Yellow Book, means generally accepted government auditing standards issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, which apply to financial audits.

Grant agreement or grant   means a legal instrument of financial assistance between a Federal agency and a recipient or between a pass-through entity and a subrecipient, consistent with 31 U.S.C. 6302, 6304:

(1) Is used to enter into a relationship, the principal purpose of which is to transfer anything of value to carry out a public purpose authorized by a law of the United States (see 31 U.S.C. 6101(3)); and not to acquire property or services for the Federal agency or pass-through entity's direct benefit or use;

(2) Is distinguished from a cooperative agreement in that it does not provide for substantial involvement of the Federal agency in carrying out the activity contemplated by the Federal award.

(3) Does not include an agreement that provides only:

(i) Direct United States Government cash assistance to an individual;

(ii) A subsidy;

(iii) A loan;

(vi) A loan guarantee; or

(v) Insurance.

Highest-level owner   means the entity that owns or controls an immediate owner of an applicant or that owns or controls one or more entities that control an immediate owner of an applicant. No entity owns or exercises control of the highest-level owner as defined in the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR) (48 CFR 52.204-17).

Hospital   means a facility licensed as a hospital under the law of any State or a facility operated as a hospital by the United States, a State, or a subdivision of a State.

Improper payment   means a payment that should not have been made or that was made in an incorrect amount under statutory, contractual, administrative, or other legally applicable requirements. The term improper payment includes: any payment to an ineligible recipient; any payment for an ineligible good or service; any duplicate payment; any payment for a good or service not received, except for those payments where authorized by law; any payment that is not authorized by law; and any payment that does not account for credit for applicable discounts. See OMB Circular A-123 Appendix C, Requirements for Payment Integrity Improvement for additional definitions and guidance on the requirements for payment integrity.

Indian Tribe   means any Indian Tribe, band, nation, or other organized group or community, including any Alaska Native village or regional or village corporation as defined in or established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. Chapter 33), which is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the United States to Indians because of their status as Indians. See 25 U.S.C. 5304(e). This includes any Indian Tribe identified in the annually published Bureau of Indian Affairs list of “Indian Entities Recognized and Eligible to Receive Services” and other entities that qualify as an Alaska Native village or regional village corporation as defined in or established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act.

Indirect cost   means those costs incurred for a common or joint purpose benefitting more than one cost objective and not readily assignable to the cost objectives specifically benefitted, without effort disproportionate to the results achieved. It may be necessary to establish multiple pools of indirect costs to facilitate equitable distribution of indirect expenses to the cost objectives served. Indirect cost pools must be distributed to benefitted cost objectives on basis that will produce an equitable result in consideration of relative benefits derived. For Institutions of Higher Education (IHE), the term facilities and administrative (F&A) cost is often used to refer to indirect costs.

Indirect cost rate proposal   means the documentation prepared by a recipient to substantiate its request to establish an indirect cost rate as described in appendices III through VII and appendix IX to this part.

Information technology systems   means computing devices, ancillary equipment, software, firmware, and related procedures, services (including support services), and resources. See also the definitions of computing devices and equipment in this section.

Institution of Higher Education (IHE)   is defined at 20 U.S.C. 1001.

Intangible property   means property having no physical existence, such as trademarks, copyrights, data (including data licenses), websites, IP licenses, trade secrets, patents, patent applications, and property such as loans, notes and other debt instruments, lease agreements, stocks and other instruments of property ownership of either tangible or intangible property, such as intellectual property, software, or software subscriptions or licenses. Intermediate cost objective means a cost objective that is used to accumulate indirect costs or service center costs that are subsequently allocated to one or more indirect cost pools or final cost objectives. See this section's definitions of cost objective and final cost objective.

Internal control   for recipients and subrecipients means processes designed and implemented by recipients and subrecipients to provide reasonable assurance regarding the achievement of objectives in the following categories:

(1) Effectiveness and efficiency of operations;

(2) Reliability of reporting for internal and external use; and

(3) Compliance with applicable laws and regulations.

Loan   means a Federal loan or loan guarantee received or administered by a recipient or subrecipient, except as used in this section's definition of program income.

(1) The term “direct loan” means a disbursement of funds by the Federal Government to a non-Federal borrower under a contract that requires the repayment of such funds with or without interest. The term includes the purchase of, or participation in, a loan made by another lender and financing arrangements that defer payment for more than 90 days, including the sale of a Federal Government asset on credit terms. The term does not include the acquisition of a federally guaranteed loan in satisfaction of default claims or the price support loans of the Commodity Credit Corporation.

(2) The term “direct loan obligation” means a binding agreement by a Federal agency to make a direct loan when specified conditions are fulfilled by the borrower.

(3) The term “loan guarantee” means any Federal Government guarantee, insurance, or other pledges for the payment of all or a part of the principal or interest on any debt obligation of a non-Federal borrower to a non-Federal lender but does not include the insurance of deposits, shares, or other withdrawable accounts in financial institutions.

(4) The term “loan guarantee commitment” means a binding agreement by a Federal agency to make a loan guarantee when specified conditions are fulfilled by the borrower, the lender, or any other party to the guarantee agreement.

Local government   means any unit of government within a State, including a:

(1) County;

(2) Borough;

(3) Municipality;

(4) City;

(5) Town;

(6) Township;

(7) Parish;

(8) Local public authority, including any public housing agency under the United States Housing Act of 1937;

(9) Special district;

(10) School district;

(11) Intrastate district;

(12) Council of governments, whether or not incorporated as a nonprofit corporation under State law; and

(13) Any other agency or instrumentality of a multi-, regional, or intra-State or local government.

Major program   means a Federal program determined by the auditor to be a major program in accordance with § 200.518 or a program identified as a major program by a Federal agency or pass-through entity in accordance with § 200.503(e).

Management decision   means the Federal agency's or pass-through entity's written determination, provided to the auditee, of the adequacy of the auditee's proposed corrective actions to address the findings based on its evaluation of the audit findings and proposed corrective actions.

Micro-purchase   means an individual procurement transaction for supplies or services, the aggregate amount of which does not exceed the micro-purchase threshold. Micro-purchases comprise a subset of a recipient's or subrecipient's small purchases using informal procurement methods as set forth in § 200.320.

Micro-purchase threshold   means the dollar amount at or below which a recipient or subrecipient may purchase property, or services using micro-purchase procedures (see § 200.320). Generally, except as provided in § 200.320, the micro-purchase threshold for procurement activities administered under Federal awards is not to exceed the amount set by the FAR at 48 CFR part 2, subpart 2.1, unless a higher threshold is requested by the recipient or subrecipient and approved by the cognizant agency for indirect costs.

Modified Total Direct Cost (MTDC)   means all direct salaries and wages, applicable fringe benefits, materials and supplies, services, travel, and up to the first $50,000 of each subaward (regardless of the period of performance of the subawards under the award). MTDC excludes equipment, capital expenditures, charges for patient care, rental costs, tuition remission, scholarships and fellowships, participant support costs, and the portion of each subaward in excess of $50,000. Other items may only be excluded when necessary to avoid a serious inequity in the distribution of indirect costs and with the approval of the cognizant agency for indirect costs.

Non-discretionary award   means an award made by the Federal agency to specific recipients in accordance with statutory, eligibility, and compliance requirements, such that in keeping with specific statutory authority, the Federal agency cannot exercise judgment (“discretion”). A non-discretionary award amount could be specifically determined or by formula.

Non-Federal entity (NFE)   means a State, local government, Indian Tribe, Institution of Higher Education (IHE), or nonprofit organization that carries out a Federal award as a recipient or subrecipient.

Nonprofit organization   means any organization that:

(1) Is operated primarily for scientific, educational, service, charitable, or similar purposes in the public interest;

(2) Is not organized primarily for profit;

(3) Uses net proceeds to maintain, improve, or expand the organization's operations; and

(4) Is not an IHE.

Notice of funding opportunity   means a formal announcement of the availability of Federal funding through a financial assistance program from a Federal agency. The notice of funding opportunity provides information on the award, such as who is eligible to apply, the evaluation criteria for selecting a recipient or subrecipient, the required components of an application, and how to submit the application. The notice of funding opportunity is any paper or electronic issuance that an agency uses to announce a funding opportunity, whether it is called a “program announcement,” “notice of funding availability,” “broad agency announcement,” “research announcement,” “solicitation,” or some other term.

Office of Management and Budget (OMB)   means the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget.

Oversight agency for audit   means the Federal agency that provides the predominant amount of funding directly (direct funding) (as listed on the schedule of expenditures of Federal awards, see § 200.510(b)) to a recipient or subrecipient unless OMB designates a specific cognizant agency for audit. When the direct funding represents less than 25 percent of the total Federal expenditures (as direct and sub-awards) by the recipient or subrecipient, then the Federal agency with the predominant amount of total funding is the designated oversight agency for audit. When there is no direct funding, the Federal agency that is the predominant source of pass-through funding must assume the oversight responsibilities. The duties of the oversight agency for audit and the process for any reassignments are described in § 200.513(b).

Participant   generally means an individual participating in or attending program activities under a Federal award, such as trainings or conferences, but who is not responsible for implementation of the Federal award. Individuals committing effort to the development or delivery of program activities under a Federal award (such as consultants, project personnel, or staff members of a recipient or subrecipient) are not participants. Examples of participants may include community members participating in a community outreach program, members of the public whose perspectives or input are sought as part of a program, students, or conference attendees.

Participant support costs   means direct costs that support participants (see definition for Participant in § 200.1) and their involvement in a Federal award, such as stipends, subsistence allowances, travel allowances, registration fees, temporary dependent care, and per diem paid directly to or on behalf of participants.

Pass-through entity   means a recipient or subrecipient that provides a subaward to a subrecipient (including lower tier subrecipients) to carry out part of a Federal program. The authority of the pass-through entity under this part flows through the subaward agreement between the pass-through entity and subrecipient.

Performance goal   means a measurable target level of performance expressed as a tangible, measurable objective, against which actual achievement can be compared, including a goal expressed as a quantitative standard, value, or rate. In some instances (for example, discretionary research awards), this may be limited to the requirement to submit technical performance reports (to be evaluated in accordance with agency policy).

Period of performance   means the time interval between the start and end date of a Federal award, which may include one or more budget periods. Identification of the period of performance in the Federal award consistent with § 200.211(b)(5) does not commit the Federal agency to fund the award beyond the currently approved budget period.

Personal property   means property other than real property. It may be tangible or intangible.

Personally Identifiable Information (PII)   means information that can be used to distinguish or trace an individual's identity, either alone or when combined with other personal or identifying information that is linked or linkable to a specific individual. Some PII is available in public sources such as telephone books, websites, and university listings. The definition of PII is not attached to any single category of information or technology. Instead, it requires a case-by-case assessment of the specific risk that an individual can be identified. Non-PII can become PII whenever additional information is made publicly available, in any medium and from any source, that could be used to identify an individual when combined with other available information.

Prior approval   means the written approval obtained in advance by an authorized official of a Federal agency or pass-through entity of certain costs or programmatic decisions.

Program income   means gross income earned by the recipient or subrecipient that is directly generated by a supported activity or earned as a result of the Federal award during the period of performance except as provided in § 200.307(c). Program income includes but is not limited to income from fees for services performed, the use or rental of real or personal property acquired under Federal awards, the sale of commodities or items fabricated under a Federal award, license fees, and royalties on patents and copyrights, and principal and interest on loans made with Federal award funds. Interest earned on advances of Federal funds is not program income. Except as otherwise provided in Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of the Federal award, program income does not include rebates, credits, discounts, and interest earned on any of them. See § 200.407. See also 35 U.S.C. 200-212 “Disposition of Rights in Educational Awards,” which applies to inventions made under Federal awards.

Project cost   means total allowable costs incurred under a Federal award and all cost sharing, including third-party contributions.

Property   means real property or personal property. See this section's definitions of real property and personal property.

Protected Personally Identifiable Information (Protected PII)   means PII (see definition in this section), except for PII that must be disclosed by law. Examples of PII include, but are not limited to, social security number; passport number; credit card numbers; clearances, bank numbers; biometrics; date and place of birth; mother's maiden name; criminal, medical and financial records; and educational transcripts.

Questioned cost   has the meaning given in paragraphs (1) through (3).

(1) Questioned cost  means an amount, expended or received from a Federal award, that in the auditor's judgment:

(i) Is noncompliant or suspected noncompliant with Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of the Federal award;

(ii) At the time of the audit, lacked adequate documentation to support compliance; or

(iii) Appeared unreasonable and did not reflect the actions a prudent person would take in the circumstances.

(2) The questioned cost amount under (1)(ii) is calculated as if the portion of a transaction that lacked adequate documentation were confirmed noncompliant.

(3) There is no questioned cost solely because of:

(i) Deficiencies in internal control; or

(ii) Noncompliance with the reporting type of compliance requirement (described in the compliance supplement) if this noncompliance does not affect the amount expended or received from the Federal award.

(4) Known questioned cost  means a questioned cost specifically identified by the auditor. Known questioned costs are a subset of likely questioned costs.

(5) Likely questioned cost  means the auditor's best estimate of total questioned costs, not just the known questioned costs. Likely questioned costs are developed by extrapolating from audit evidence obtained, for example, by projecting known questioned costs identified in an audit sample to the entire population from which the sample was drawn. In evaluating the effect of questioned costs on the opinion on compliance, the auditor considers the likely questioned costs, not just the known questioned costs.

(6) Questioned costs are not improper payments until reviewed and confirmed to be improper payments as defined in OMB Circular A-123 Appendix C.

Real property   means land, including land improvements, structures, and appurtenances thereto, and legal interests in land, including fee interest, licenses, rights of way, and easements. Real property excludes moveable machinery and equipment.

Recipient   means an entity that receives a Federal award directly from a Federal agency to carry out an activity under a Federal program. The term recipient does not include subrecipients or individuals that are participants or beneficiaries of the award.

Renewal award   means a Federal award for which the start date is contiguous with, or closely follows, the end of the expiring Federal award. The start date of a renewal award begins a new and distinct period of performance.

Research and Development (R&D)   means all basic and applied research activities and all development activities performed by a recipient or subrecipient. The term research also includes activities involving the training of individuals in research techniques where such activities use the same facilities as other research and development activities and where such activities are not included in the instruction function. “Research” is the systematic study directed toward fuller scientific knowledge or understanding of the subject studied. “Development” is the systematic use of knowledge and understanding gained from research to produce useful materials, devices, systems, or methods, including designing and developing prototypes and processes.

Simplified acquisition threshold   means the dollar amount below which a recipient or subrecipient may purchase property or services using small purchase methods (see § 200.320). Recipients and subrecipients adopt small purchase procedures to expedite the purchase of items at or below the simplified acquisition threshold. The simplified acquisition threshold set in the FAR at 48 CFR part 2, subpart 2.1 is used in this part as the simplified acquisition threshold for secondary procurement activities administered under Federal awards. The recipient or subrecipient is responsible for determining an appropriate simplified acquisition threshold, which is less than or equal to the dollar value established in the FAR, based on internal controls, an evaluation of risk, and its documented procurement procedures. Recipients and subrecipients should also determine if local government purchasing laws apply. This threshold must never exceed the dollar value established in the FAR.

Special purpose equipment   means equipment that is used only for research, medical, scientific, or other similar technical activities. Examples of special purpose equipment include microscopes, x-ray machines, surgical instruments, spectrometers, and associated software. See also the definitions of equipment and general purpose equipment in this section.

State   means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and any agency or instrumentality thereof exclusive of local governments.

Student Financial Aid (SFA)   means Federal awards under those programs of general student assistance, such as those authorized by Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended (20 U.S.C. 1070-1099d), which the U.S. Department of Education administers, and similar programs provided by other Federal agencies. It does not include Federal awards under programs that provide fellowships or similar Federal awards to students on a competitive basis or for specified studies or research.

Subaward   means an award provided by a pass-through entity to a subrecipient for the subrecipient to contribute to the goals and objectives of the project by carrying out part of a Federal award received by the pass-through entity. It does not include payments to a contractor, beneficiary, or participant. A subaward may be provided through any form of legal agreement consistent with criteria in with § 200.331, including an agreement the pass-through entity considers a contract.

Subrecipient   means an entity that receives a subaward from a pass-through entity to carry out part of a Federal award. The term subrecipient does not include a beneficiary or participant. A subrecipient may also be a recipient of other Federal awards directly from a Federal agency.

Subsidiary   means an entity in which more than 50 percent of the entity is owned or controlled directly by a parent corporation or through another subsidiary of a parent corporation.

Supply   means all tangible personal property other than those described in the equipment definition. A computing device is a supply if the acquisition cost is below the lesser of the capitalization level established by the recipient or subrecipient for financial statement purposes or $10,000, regardless of the length of its useful life. See this section's definitions of computing devices and equipment.

Telecommunications cost   means the cost of using communication technologies such as mobile phones, landlines, and the internet.

Termination   means the action a Federal agency or pass-through entity takes to discontinue a Federal award, in whole or in part, at any time before the planned end date of the period of performance. Termination does not include discontinuing a Federal award due to a lack of available funds.

Third-party in-kind contributions   means the value of non-cash contributions (meaning, property or services) that:

(1) Benefit a project or program funded by a Federal award; and

(2) Are contributed by non-Federal third parties, without charge, to a recipient or subrecipient under a Federal award.

Unliquidated financial obligation   means financial obligations incurred by the recipient or subrecipient but not paid (liquidated) for financial reports prepared on a cash basis. For reports prepared on an accrual basis, these are financial obligations incurred by the recipient or subrecipient but for which expenditures have not been recorded.

Unobligated balance   means the amount of funds under a Federal award that the recipient or subrecipient has not obligated. The amount is computed by subtracting the cumulative amount of the recipient's or subrecipient's unliquidated financial obligations and expenditures under the Federal award from the cumulative amount of funds the Federal agency or pass-through entity authorized the recipient or subrecipient to obligate.

Voluntary committed cost sharing   means cost sharing specifically pledged voluntarily in the proposal's budget on the part of the recipient or subrecipient, which becomes a binding requirement of the Federal award. See § 200.306.

[89 FR 30136, Apr. 22, 2024, as amended at 89 FR 79732, Oct. 1, 2024]

Subpart B—General Provisions

§ 200.100 Purpose.

(a) Purpose. (1) This part establishes uniform administrative requirements, cost principles, and audit requirements for Federal awards. Federal agencies must not impose additional requirements except as allowed in §§ 200.102, 200.211, or unless specifically required by Federal statute, regulation, or Executive order.

(2) This part provides Federal agencies with the policy for collecting and submitting information on all Federal financial assistance programs to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and communicating this information to the public. It also establishes Federal policies related to the delivery of this information to the public, including through the use of electronic media. It also sets forth how the General Services Administration (GSA), OMB, and Federal agencies implement the Federal Program Information Act (31 U.S.C. 6101-6106).

(b) Administrative requirements.  Subparts B through D set forth the uniform administrative requirements for Federal financial assistance. This includes establishing requirements for Federal agencies management of Federal financial assistance programs before a Federal award is made, and requirements that Federal agencies may impose on recipients and subrecipients throughout the lifecycle of a Federal award.

(c) Cost principles.  Subpart E establishes principles for determining allowable costs incurred by recipients and subrecipients under Federal awards. These principles are for the purpose of cost determination. They do not address the circumstances nor dictate the extent of Federal Government funding of a particular program or project.

(d) Single Audit Requirements and Audit Follow-up.  Subpart F is issued pursuant to the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996 (31 U.S.C. 7501-7507). Subpart F sets forth the standards for achieving consistency and uniformity among Federal agencies for the audit of non-Federal entities expending Federal awards. Subpart F also provides the policies and procedures for Federal agencies or pass-through entities when using the results of these audits.

§ 200.101 Applicability.

(a) General applicability to Federal agencies. (1) Subparts A through F apply to Federal agencies that make Federal awards to non-Federal entities. As provided in paragraph (a)(2), subparts A through E may also apply to Federal agencies that make Federal awards to other entities.

(2) Federal agencies must apply subparts A though F of this part to non-Federal entities unless a particular section of this part or Federal statute provides otherwise. Federal agencies may apply subparts A through E of this part to Federal agencies, for-profit organizations, foreign public entities, or foreign organizations as permitted in agency regulations or program statutes, except when a Federal agency determines that the application of these subparts would be inconsistent with the international responsibilities of the United States or the laws of a foreign government. Subpart F only applies to non-Federal entities as defined in the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996 (31 U.S.C. 7501-7507). Federal agencies should apply the requirements to all recipients in a consistent and equitable manner to the extent permitted within applicable statutes, regulations, and policies.

(3) Throughout subparts A through F, the word “must” indicates a requirement. The words “should” or “may” indicate a recommended approach and permit discretion.

(4) Throughout subparts A through E, when the word “or” is used between the terms “recipient” and “subrecipient,” any requirements or recommendations in the relevant provisions of this part apply to the recipient, the subrecipient, or both, as applicable. The use of “or” between recipient and subrecipient does not mean that applicable requirements or recommendations only apply to one of these entities unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.

(b) Applicability to Federal financial assistance. (1) Paragraphs (b)(2) through (b)(5) of this section describe what portions of this part apply to specific types of Federal financial assistance. Paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section explain additional exceptions related to governing provisions and Federal program applicability. The terms and conditions of Federal awards (including this part) flow down to subawards to subrecipients unless a particular section of this part or the terms and conditions of the Federal award specifically indicate otherwise. Pass-through entities must comply with the requirements described in subpart D, §§ 200.331 through 200.333, and any other sections of this part addressing pass-through entities.

(2) Subpart A (Acronyms and Definitions) and subpart B (General Provisions) apply to all Federal financial assistance, except that §§ 200.111 (English language), 200.112 (Conflict of interest), and 200.113 (Mandatory disclosures) do not apply to agreements for loans, loan guarantees, interest subsidies, and insurance.

(3) Subpart C (Pre-Federal Award Requirements and Contents of Federal Awards) and subpart D (Post Federal Award Requirements) only apply to grants and cooperative agreements with the following exceptions:

(i) Section 200.203 (Requirement to provide public notice of Federal financial assistance programs) also applies to agreements for loans, loan guarantees, interest subsidies, and insurance;

(ii) Section 200.216 (Prohibition on certain telecommunications and video surveillance equipment or services) applies to loans and grants (see Pub. L. 115-232, Div. A, Title VIII, § 889, as amended); and

(iii) Sections 200.303 (Internal controls) and 200.331 through 200.333 (Subrecipient monitoring and management) also apply to all types of Federal financial assistance.

(4) Subpart E (Cost Principles) applies to grants and cooperative agreements, but does not apply to the following:

(i) Food commodities provided through grants and cooperative agreements;

(ii) Fixed amount awards, except for §§ 200.400(g), 200.402 through 200.405, and 200.407(d), which do apply;

(iii) Agreements for loans, loan guarantees, interest subsidies, and insurance; and

(iv) Federal awards to hospitals (see Appendix IX—Hospital Cost Principles).

(5) Subpart F (Audit Requirements) only applies to the following items when awarded to a non-Federal entity:

(i) Grants and cooperative agreements (including fixed amount awards);

(ii) Contracts and subcontracts awarded under the FAR (except for fixed price contracts and subcontracts);

(iii) Agreements for loans, loan guarantees, interest subsidies, and insurance; and

(iv) Any other form of Federal financial assistance as defined by the Single Audit Act Amendment of 1996 (codified at 31 U.S.C. 7501-7507).

(c) Applicability to different types of contracts and subcontracts awarded by a Federal agency to a non-Federal entity under the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR). (1) Paragraphs (c)(2) and (c)(3) of this section describe what portions of this part apply to specific types of contracts and subcontracts awarded by a Federal agency to a non-Federal entity. See also paragraph (b)(5)(ii) on audit requirements. For both paragraphs (c)(2) and (c)(3):

(i) In cases of conflict between the requirements of applicable portions of this part and the terms and conditions of the contract, the terms and conditions of the contract and the FAR prevail.

(ii) When the Cost Accounting Standards (CAS) are applicable to the contract or subcontract, they also take precedence over this part.

(iii) In addition, costs that are identified as unallowable under 41 U.S.C. 4304(a) and as stated in the FAR (48 CFR part 31, subpart 31.2, and 48 CFR 31.603) are always unallowable.

(2) Cost-reimbursement contract under the FAR awarded to a non-Federal entity.  When a non-Federal entity is awarded a cost-reimbursement contract under the FAR, only subpart D, §§ 200.331 through 200.333, and subparts E and F are applicable.

(3) Fixed-price contract or subcontract under the FAR awarded to a non-Federal entity.  When a non-Federal entity is awarded a fixed-price contract or subcontract under the FAR, only subpart A, subpart B (except for §§ 200.111, 200.112, and 200.113), subpart D (only at § 200.303 and §§ 200.331 through 200.333), and subpart E are applicable to the contract, except that subpart E is not applicable to fixed-price contracts and subcontracts that are not negotiated.

(d) Governing provisions.  With the exception of subpart F, which is required by the Single Audit Act, Federal statutes or regulations govern in any circumstances where they conflict with the provisions of this part. For agreements with Indian Tribes, this includes the provisions of the Indian Self-Determination and Education and Assistance Act (ISDEAA), as amended (see 25 U.S.C. 5301-5423).

(e) Program applicability.  Except for §§ 200.203, 200.216, and 200.331 through 200.333, the requirements in subparts C, D, and E do not apply to the following programs:

(1) The block grant awards authorized by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 (including Community Services), except to the extent that subpart E apply to subrecipients of Community Services Block Grant funds pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 9916(a)(1)(B);

(2) Federal awards to local education agencies under 20 U.S.C. 7702-7703b, (portions of the Impact Aid program);

(3) Payments under the Department of Veterans Affairs' State Home Per Diem Program (38 U.S.C. 1741); and

(4) Federal awards authorized under the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990, as amended:

(i) Child Care and Development Block Grant (42 U.S.C. 9858).

(ii) Child Care Mandatory and Matching Funds of the Child Care and Development Fund (42 U.S.C. 9858).

(f) Additional program applicability.  Except for §§ 200.203 and 200.216, the guidance in subpart C does not apply to the following programs:

(1) Entitlement Federal awards to carry out the following programs of the Social Security Act:

(i) Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (Title IV-A of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. 601-619);

(ii) Child Support Enforcement and Establishment of Paternity (Title IV-D of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. 651-669b);

(iii) Federal Payments for Foster Care, Prevention, and Permanency (Title IV-E of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 670-679c);

(iv) Aid to the Aged, Blind, and Disabled (Titles I, X, XIV, and XVI-AABD of the Act, as amended);

(v) Medical Assistance (Medicaid) (Title XIX of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1396-1396w-5) not including the State Medicaid Fraud Control program authorized by Section 1903(a)(6)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(a)(6)(B)); and

(vi) Children's Health Insurance Program (Title XXI of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1397aa-1397mm).

(2) A Federal award for an experimental, pilot, or demonstration project that is also supported by a Federal award listed in paragraph (f)(1) of this section.

(3) Federal awards under subsection 412(e) of the Immigration and Nationality Act and subsection 501(a) of the Refugee Education Assistance Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-422, 94 Stat. 1809), for cash assistance, medical assistance, and supplemental security income benefits to refugees and entrants and the administrative costs of providing the assistance and benefits (8 U.S.C. 1522(e)).

(4) Entitlement awards under the following programs of The National School Lunch Act:

(i) National School Lunch Program (Section 4 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1753);

(ii) Commodity Assistance (Section 6 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1755);

(iii) Special Meal Assistance (Section 11 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1759a);

(iv) Summer Food Service Program for Children (Section 13 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1761); and

(v) Child and Adult Care Food Program (Section 17 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1766).

(5) Entitlement awards under the following programs of The Child Nutrition Act of 1966:

(i) Special Milk Program (Section 3 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1772);

(ii) School Breakfast Program (Section 4 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1773); and

(iii) State Administrative Expenses (Section 7 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 1776).

(6) Entitlement awards for State Administrative Expenses under The Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (Section 16 of the Act, 7 U.S.C. 2025).

(7) Non-discretionary Federal awards under the following non-entitlement programs:

(i) Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children (Section 17 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966) 42 U.S.C. 1786;

(ii) The Emergency Food Assistance Programs (Emergency Food Assistance Act of 1983) 7 U.S.C. 7501 note; and

(iii) Commodity Supplemental Food Program (Section 5 of the Agriculture and Consumer Protection Act of 1973) 7 U.S.C. 612c note.

§ 200.102 Exceptions.

(a) OMB class exceptions.  Except for subpart F, OMB may allow exceptions from requirements of this part for classes of Federal awards, recipients, or subrecipients when the exceptions are not prohibited by statute. For example, Federal agencies may request exceptions in support of innovative program designs that apply a risk-based, data-driven framework to alleviate select compliance requirements and hold recipients accountable for good performance. See also § 200.206. Federal agencies may also request exceptions in emergency situations. When OMB allows an exception to requirements of this part, the Federal agency remains responsible for ensuring the exception is applied to Federal awards in a manner consistent with Federal statutes and regulations.

(b) Statutory and regulatory exceptions.  A Federal agency may adjust requirements to a class of Federal awards, recipients, or subrecipients when required by Federal statutes or regulations, except for the requirements in subpart F. Except for provisions in subpart F, when a Federal statute requires exceptions to requirements of this part for a class of Federal awards, recipients, or subrecipients, a Federal agency does not need OMB approval to allow those exceptions. See also § 200.106.

(c) Federal agency exceptions.  Federal agencies may allow exceptions to requirements of this part on a case-by-case basis for individual Federal awards, recipients, or subrecipients, except when the exceptions are prohibited by law or other approval is expressly required by this part. Only the cognizant agency for indirect costs may authorize exceptions related to cost allocation plans or indirect cost rate proposals. A Federal agency may also apply less restrictive requirements when issuing fixed amount awards (see § 200.1), except for those requirements imposed by statute or in subpart F.

§ 200.103 Authorities.

This part is issued under the following authorities.

(a) Subparts B through D are authorized under 31 U.S.C. 503 (the Chief Financial Officers Act, Functions of the Deputy Director for Management); the Federal Program Information Act (Pub, L. 95-220 and Pub. L. 98-169, as amended, codified at 31 U.S.C. 6101-6106); the Federal Grant and Cooperative Agreement Act of 1977 (Pub. L. 95-224, as amended, codified at 31 U.S.C. 6301-6309); 41 U.S.C. 1101-1131 (the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act); Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1970 and Executive Order 11541 (“Prescribing the Duties of the Office of Management and Budget and the Domestic Policy Council in the Executive Office of the President”); and the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996 (31 U.S.C. 7501-7507).

(b) Subpart E is authorized under the Budget and Accounting Act of 1921, as amended; the Budget and Accounting Procedures Act of 1950, as amended (31 U.S.C. 1101-1126); the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (31 U.S.C. 503-504); Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1970; and Executive Order 11541, “Prescribing the Duties of the Office of Management and Budget and the Domestic Policy Council in the Executive Office of the President.” OMB also relies on authority under 31 U.S.C. 503 and 31 U.S.C. 6307.

(c) Subpart F is authorized under the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996 (codified at 31 U.S.C. 7501-7507). OMB also relies on authority under 31 U.S.C. 503 and 31 U.S.C. 6307.

§ 200.104 Supersession.

This part superseded previous OMB guidance issued under Title 2, subtitle A, chapter II of the Code of Federal Regulations and certain OMB circulars related to uniform administrative requirements, cost principles, and audit requirements for Federal awards.

§ 200.105 Effect on other issuances.

(a) Superseding inconsistent requirements.  For Federal awards made subject to this part by a Federal agency, this part takes precedence over any administrative requirements, program manuals, handbooks, and other non-regulatory materials that are inconsistent with the requirements of this part upon implementation by the Federal agency, except to the extent that they are required by statute or authorized in accordance with § 200.102.

(b) Imposition of requirements on recipients.  Agencies may only impose legally binding requirements on recipients and subrecipients through:

(1) Notice and public comment procedures through an approved agency process, including as authorized by this part, other statutes, or regulations; or

(2) Incorporating requirements into the terms and conditions of a Federal award as permitted by Federal statute, regulation, or this part.

§ 200.106 Agency implementation.

The specific requirements and responsibilities of Federal agencies, non-Federal entities, recipients, and subrecipients are set forth in this part. Federal agencies making Federal awards to non-Federal entities must implement the language in subparts C through F of this part in codified regulations unless different provisions are required by Federal statute or are approved by OMB.

§ 200.107 OMB responsibilities.

OMB will review Federal agency regulations and implementation of this part. OMB will provide interpretations of policy requirements and assistance to ensure effective, efficient, and consistent implementation. Any exceptions will be subject to approval by OMB and only with adequate justification from the Federal agency.

§ 200.108 Inquiries.

Inquiries from Federal agencies concerning this part may be directed to OMB. Inquiries from recipients or subrecipients should be addressed to the Federal agency, the cognizant agency for indirect costs, the cognizant agency for audit, or the pass-through entity as appropriate.

§ 200.109 Review date.

OMB will review this part periodically.

§ 200.110 Effective date.

(a) The standards set forth in this part affecting the administration of Federal awards by Federal agencies become effective once implemented by Federal agencies or when any future amendment to this part becomes final.

(b) Existing negotiated indirect cost rates will remain in place until they expire. The effective date of changes to indirect cost rates must be based upon the date a newly re-negotiated rate goes into effect for the recipient's or subrecipient's fiscal year. Therefore, for indirect cost rates and cost allocation plans, the revisions to this part (as of the publication date for revisions to this guidance) become effective in generating proposals and negotiating a new rate (when the rate is re-negotiated).

§ 200.111 English language.

(a) All Federal financial assistance announcements, applications, and Federal award information should be in the English language and must be in terms of U.S. dollars. However, Federal agencies, recipients, and subrecipients may issue or translate a Federal award or other documents into another language. A Federal agency may translate formal or informal announcements of the availability of Federal funding through a financial assistance program, such as a notice of funding opportunity, when translations may serve to increase the pool of applicants or the participation of a specific community (for example, programs administered in foreign countries where the primary language is not English). Federal agencies must maintain an official controlling English version of the Federal financial assistance announcement and the Federal award, including the terms and conditions.(b) Applications, reports, and official correspondence may be submitted in languages other than English if specified in the notice of funding opportunity or the terms and conditions of the Federal award.

(c) In the event of inconsistency between English and another language, the English language meaning will control. When a significant portion of the recipient's or subrecipient's employees administering a Federal award are not fluent in English, the Federal award should be provided in English and the language(s) with which employees are more familiar.

§ 200.112 Conflict of interest.

Federal agencies must establish conflict of interest policies for Federal awards. A recipient or subrecipient must disclose in writing any potential conflict of interest to the Federal agency or pass-through entity in accordance with the established Federal agency policies.

§ 200.113 Mandatory disclosures.

An applicant, recipient, or subrecipient of a Federal award must promptly disclose whenever, in connection with the Federal award (including any activities or subawards thereunder), it has credible evidence of the commission of a violation of Federal criminal law involving fraud, conflict of interest, bribery, or gratuity violations found in Title 18 of the United States Code or a violation of the civil False Claims Act (31 U.S.C. 3729-3733). The disclosure must be made in writing to the Federal agency, the agency's Office of Inspector General, and pass-through entity (if applicable). Recipients and subrecipients are also required to report matters related to recipient integrity and performance in accordance with Appendix XII of this part. Failure to make required disclosures can result in any of the remedies described in § 200.339. (See also 2 CFR part 180, 31 U.S.C. 3321, and 41 U.S.C. 2313.)

Subpart C—Pre-Federal Award Requirements and Contents of Federal Awards

§ 200.200 Purpose.

Sections 200.201 through 200.217 prescribe instructions and other pre-award matters to be used by Federal agencies in the program planning, announcement, application, and award processes.

§ 200.201 Use of grants, cooperative agreements, fixed amount awards, and contracts.

(a) Federal awards.  The Federal agency or pass-through entity must decide on the appropriate type of agreement for a Federal award (for example, a grant, cooperative agreement, subaward, or contract) in accordance with this guidance. See the Federal Grant and Cooperative Agreement Act (31 U.S.C. 6301-6309).

(b) Fixed amount awards.  The Federal agency or pass-through entity (see § 200.333) may use fixed amount awards (see the definition of fixed amount awards in § 200.1) for which the following conditions apply:

(1) The Federal award amount is negotiated using the cost principles (or other pricing information) as a guide. See § 200.101(b)(4)(ii) for further information on which provisions in subpart E (cost principles) apply to fixed amount awards. The Federal agency or pass-through entity may use fixed amount awards if the project scope has measurable goals and objectives and if accurate cost, historical, or unit pricing data is available to establish a fixed budget based on a reasonable estimate of actual costs. Budgets for fixed amount awards are negotiated with the recipient or subrecipient and the total amount of Federal funding is determined in accordance with the recipient's or subrecipient's proposal, available pricing data, and subpart E. Accountability must be based on performance and results, which can be communicated in performance reports or through routine monitoring. There is no expected routine monitoring of the actual costs incurred by the recipient or subrecipient under the Federal award. Therefore, no financial reporting is required. This does not absolve the recipient or subrecipient from the record retention requirements contained in §§ 200.334 through 200.338; nor does it absolve the recipient or subrecipient of the responsibilities of making records available for review during an audit. See § 200.101(b)(5)(i). Payments must be based on meeting specific requirements of the Federal award. Some of the ways in which the Federal award may be paid include, but are not limited to:

(i) In several partial payments. The amount of each payment as well as the “milestone” or event triggering the payment, should be agreed to in advance and included in the Federal award;

(ii) On a unit price basis. The defined unit(s) or price(s) should be agreed to in advance and included in the Federal award; or

(iii) In one payment at the completion of the Federal award.

(2) A fixed amount award must not be used in programs that require cost sharing.

(3) A fixed amount award may generate and use program income in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Federal award; however, the requirements of § 200.307 do not apply.

(4) At the end of a fixed amount award, the recipient or subrecipient must certify in writing to the Federal agency or pass-through entity that the project was completed as agreed to in the Federal award, or identify those activities that were not completed, and that all expenditures were incurred in accordance with § 200.403. When the required activities were not carried out, including fixed amount awards paid on a unit price basis under 200.201(b)(1)(ii), the amount of the Federal award must be reduced by the amount that reflects the activities that were not completed in accordance with the Federal award. When the required activities were completed in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Federal award, the recipient or subrecipient is entitled to any unexpended funds.

(5) Periodic reports may be established for fixed amount awards.

(6) Prior approval requirements that apply to fixed amount awards are § 200.308(f) (paragraphs 1 through 3, 6 through 8, and 10) and § 200.333.

§ 200.202 Program planning and design.

(a) The Federal agency must design a program and create an Assistance Listing before announcing the Notice of Funding Opportunity. A program must be designed:

(1) With clear goals and objectives that provide meaningful results and be consistent with the Federal authorizing legislation of the program;

(2) To measure performance based on the goals and objectives developed during program planning and design. Performance measures may differ depending on the type of program. See § 200.301 for more information on performance measurement;

(3) To align with the strategic goals and objectives within the Federal agency's performance plan and support the Federal agency's performance measurement, management, customer service initiatives, and reporting as required by Part 6 of OMB Circular A-11 (Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget);

(4) To align with the Program Management Improvement Accountability Act (Pub. L. 114-264) as well as the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act (Pub. L. 115-435), as applicable; and

(5) To encourage applicants to engage, when practicable, during the design phase, members of the community that will benefit from or be impacted by a program.

(b) Federal agencies should develop programs in consultation with communities benefiting from or impacted by the program. In addition, Federal agencies should consider available data, evidence, and evaluation results from past programs and make every effort to extend eligibility requirements to all potential applicants. Federal agencies are encouraged to coordinate with other agencies during program planning and design, particularly when the goals and objectives of a program or project align with those of other agencies.

§ 200.203 Requirement to provide public notice of Federal financial assistance programs.

(a) The Federal agency must maintain an accurate list of Federal programs in the Assistance Listings maintained by the General Services Administration (GSA) at SAM.gov.

(1) The Assistance Listings is the comprehensive government-wide source of Federal financial assistance program information produced by the executive branch of the Federal Government.

(2) The information that the Federal agency must submit to GSA for approval by OMB is listed in paragraph (b). GSA must prescribe the format for the submission in coordination with OMB.

(3) The Federal agency must assign the appropriate Assistance Listing before making the Federal award unless exigent circumstances require otherwise (for example, timing requirements imposed by a Federal statute).

(b) To the extent practicable, the Federal agency must create, update, and manage Assistance Listing entries based on the authorizing statute for the program and comply with additional guidance provided by GSA (in consultation with OMB) to ensure consistent and accurate information is available to prospective applicants. Assistance Listings should be communicated to the public in plain language. Accordingly, Federal agencies must submit the following information to GSA when creating an Assistance Listing:

(1) Program Description, Purpose, Goals, and Measurement.  A brief summary of the statutory or regulatory requirements of the program and its intended outcome. Where appropriate, the program description, purpose, goals, and performance measurement should align with the strategic goals and objectives within the Federal agency's performance plan and should support the Federal agency's performance measurement, management, customer experience initiatives, and reporting as required by Part 6 of OMB Circular A-11;

(2) Identification.  Identification of whether the program will issue Federal awards on a discretionary or non-discretionary basis;

(3) Projected total amount of funds available for the program.  Estimates based on previous year funding are acceptable if current appropriations are not available at the time of the submission;

(4) Anticipated source of available funds.  The statutory authority for funding the program and the agency, sub-agency, or specific program unit that will issue the Federal awards (to the extent possible) and associated funding identifier (for example, Treasury Account Symbol(s));

(5) General eligibility requirements.  The statutory, regulatory, or other eligibility factors or considerations that determine the applicant's qualification for Federal awards under the program (for example, type of recipient); and

(6) Applicability of Single Audit Requirements.  Applicability of Single Audit Requirements as required by subpart F.

§ 200.204 Notices of funding opportunities.

The Federal agency must announce specific funding opportunities for Federal financial assistance that will be openly competed. The term openly competed means opportunities that are not directed to one or more specifically identified applicants. To the extent possible, the Federal agency should communicate opportunities to the public in plain language to ensure the announcement is accessible to diverse communities of eligible applicants, including underserved communities. The Federal agency should also make efforts to limit the length and complexity of the announcement and only include the information that is necessary for the effective communication of the program objectives. Federal agencies may offer pre-application technical assistance or provide clarifying information for funding opportunities. However, Federal agencies must ensure these resources are made accessible and widely available to all potential applicants (for example, by posting answers to questions and requests on Grants.gov). The Federal agency should make every effort to identify in the NOFO all eligible applicants (for example, different types of nonprofit organizations such as labor unions and tribal organizations). The following information must be provided in a public notice:

(a) Summary information in notices of funding opportunities.  The Federal agency must display the following information on Grants.gov, in a location preceding the full text of the announcement:

(1) Federal Agency Name;

(2) Funding Opportunity Title;

(3) Announcement Type (whether the funding opportunity is the initial announcement or a modification of a previously announced opportunity);

(4) Funding Opportunity Number (required, if the Federal agency has assigned a number to the funding opportunity announcement);

(5) Assistance Listing Number(s);

(6) Funding Details. To the extent appropriate, the total amount of funding that the Federal agency expects to award, the anticipated number of awards, and the expected dollar values of individual awards, which may be a range or average;

(7) Key Dates. Key dates include due dates for submitting applications or Executive Order 12372 submissions, as well as for any letters of intent or preapplications. For any announcement issued before a program's application materials are available, key dates also include the date on which those materials will be released; and any other additional information, as deemed applicable by the Federal agency. If possible, the Federal agency should provide an anticipated award date. If the NOFO states that applications will be evaluated on a “rolling” basis (that is, at different points during a specified period of time), the Federal agency should provide an estimate of the time needed to process an application and notify the applicant of the Federal agency's decision;

(8) Executive Summary. A brief description that is written in plain language and summarizes the goals and objectives of the program, the target audience, and eligible applicants. The text of the executive summary should not exceed 500 words; and

(9) Agency contact information.

(b) Availability period.  The Federal agency should make all funding opportunities available for application for at least 60 calendar days. However, the Federal agency may modify the availability period of an opportunity as needed. For example, extending the period may be necessary to provide technical assistance to an applicant pool that was not anticipated when the announcement was made or has less experience with applying for Federal financial assistance. The Federal agency may also determine that an availability period of less than 60 days is sufficient for a particular funding opportunity. However, no funding opportunity should be available for less than 30 calendar days unless the Federal agency determines that exigent circumstances justify this.

(c) Full text of funding opportunities. (1) The Federal agency must include the information in Appendix I for every funding opportunity.

(2) Federal agencies should ensure that funding opportunities are written using plain language. To the extent possible Federal agencies must streamline opportunities to make them accessible, particularly for funding opportunities that are new, targeted to underserved communities, or intended to reach inexperienced applicants.

(3) To reduce application burden, Federal agencies should consider whether programmatic or administrative requirements specific to the agency, program, or funding opportunity must be met at the time of application or as a requirement of receiving a Federal award.

§ 200.205 Federal agency review of merit of proposals.

Unless prohibited by Federal statute, the Federal agency must design and execute a merit review process of applications for discretionary Federal awards. The objective of a merit review process is to select recipients most likely to be successful in delivering results based on the program objectives as outlined in section § 200.202. A merit review is an objective process of evaluating Federal award applications in accordance with the written standards of the Federal agency. These standards should identify the number of people the agency requires to participate in the merit review process and provide opportunities for a diverse group of participants, including those representing underserved communities. The merit review process explained in this section must be described or incorporated by reference in the applicable funding opportunity. See appendix I to this part. See also § 200.204. The Federal agency must also periodically review its merit review process.

§ 200.206 Federal agency review of risk posed by applicants.

(a) Review of OMB-designated repositories of government-wide data. (1) Prior to making a Federal award, the Federal agency is required to review eligibility information for applicants and financial integrity information for applicants available in OMB-designated databases per the Payment Integrity Information Act of 2019 (Pub. L. 116-117), the “Do Not Pay Initiative” (31 U.S.C. 3354), and 41 U.S.C. 2313.

(2) The Federal agency is required to review the responsibility and qualification records available in the non-public segment of the System for Award Management (SAM.gov) prior to making a Federal award where the Federal share is expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold, defined at 41 U.S.C. 134, over the period of performance. See 41 U.S.C. 2313. The Federal agency must consider all of the information available in SAM.gov with regard to the applicant and any immediate highest-level owner, predecessor (meaning, an organization that is replaced by a successor), or subsidiary, identified for that applicant in SAM.gov. See Public Law 112-239, National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2013; 41 U.S.C. 2313(d). The information in the system for a prior recipient of a Federal award must demonstrate a satisfactory record of administering programs or activities under Federal financial assistance or procurement awards, and integrity and business ethics. The Federal agency may make a Federal award to a recipient that does not fully meet these standards if it is determined that the information is not relevant to the Federal award under consideration or there are specific conditions that can appropriately mitigate the risk associated with the recipient in accordance with § 200.208.

(b) Risk Assessment. (1) The Federal agency must establish and maintain policies and procedures for conducting a risk assessment to evaluate the risks posed by applicants before issuing Federal awards. This assessment helps identify risks that may affect the advancement toward or the achievement of a project's goals and objectives. Risk assessments assist Federal managers in determining appropriate resources and time to devote to project oversight and monitor recipient progress. This assessment may incorporate elements such as the quality of the application, award amount, risk associated with the program, cybersecurity risks, fraud risks, and impacts on local jobs and the community. If the Federal agency determines that the Federal award will be made, specific conditions that address the assessed risk may be implemented in the Federal award. The risk criteria to be evaluated must be described in the announcement of the funding opportunity described in § 200.204.

(2) In evaluating risks posed by applicants, the Federal agency should consider the following items:

(i) Financial stability.  The applicant's record of effectively managing financial risks, assets, and resources;

(ii) Management systems and standards.  Quality of management systems and ability to meet the management standards prescribed in this part;

(iii) History of performance.  The applicant's record of managing previous and current Federal awards, including compliance with reporting requirements and conformance to the terms and conditions of Federal awards, if applicable;

(iv) Audit reports and findings.  Reports and findings from audits performed under subpart F or the reports and findings of any other available audits, if applicable; and

(v) Ability to effectively implement requirements.  The applicant's ability to effectively implement statutory, regulatory, or other requirements imposed on recipients of Federal awards.

(c) Adjustments to the Risk Assessment.  The Federal agency may modify the risk assessment at any time during the period of performance, which may justify changes to the terms and conditions of the Federal award. See § 200.208.

(d) Suspension and debarment compliance.  The Federal agency must comply with the government-wide suspension and debarment guidance in 2 CFR part 180 and individual Federal agency suspension and debarment requirements in title 2 of the Code of Federal Regulations. Federal agencies must also require recipients to comply with these requirements. These requirements restrict making Federal awards, subawards, and contracts with certain parties that are debarred, suspended, or otherwise excluded from receiving Federal awards or participating in Federal awards.

§ 200.207 Standard application requirements.

(a) Paperwork clearances.  The Federal agency may only use application information collections approved by OMB under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 and OMB's implementing regulations in 5 CFR part 1320 and in alignment with OMB-approved, government-wide data elements available from the OMB-designated standards lead. Examples of application information collections approved by OMB include the Standard Forms 424 (SF-424), which is available on Grants.gov, and the Biographical Sketch Common Form (OMB Control Number 3145-0279), which Federal agencies should use to collect biographical sketches and other disclosure information from award applicants. OMB will authorize additional information collections only on a limited basis and consistent with these requirements.

(b) Information collection.  The Federal agency may inform applicants that they do not need to provide certain information already being collected through other means.

§ 200.208 Specific conditions.

(a) Federal agencies are responsible for ensuring that specific Federal award conditions and performance expectations are consistent with the program design (See § 200.202 and § 200.301).

(b) The Federal agency or pass-through entity may adjust specific conditions in the Federal award based on an analysis of the following factors:

(1) Review of OMB-designated repositories of government-wide data (for example, SAM.gov) or review of its risk assessment (See § 200.206);

(2) The recipient's or subrecipient's history of compliance with the terms and conditions of Federal awards;

(3) The recipient's or subrecipient's ability to meet expected performance goals as described in § 200.211; or

(4) A determination of whether a recipient or subrecipient has inadequate financial capability to perform the Federal award.

(c) Specific conditions may include the following:

(1) Requiring payments as reimbursements rather than advance payments;

(2) Withholding authority to proceed to the next phase until receipt of evidence of acceptable performance;

(3) Requiring additional or more detailed financial reports;

(4) Requiring additional project monitoring;

(5) Requiring the recipient or subrecipient to obtain technical or management assistance; or

(6) Establishing additional prior approvals.

(d) Prior to imposing specific conditions, the Federal agency or pass-through entity must notify the recipient or subrecipient as to:

(1) The nature of the specific condition(s);

(2) The reason why the specific condition(s) is being imposed;

(3) The nature of the action needed to remove the specific condition(s);

(4) The time allowed for completing the actions; and

(5) The method for requesting the Federal agency or pass-through entity to reconsider imposing a specific condition.

(e) Any specific conditions must be promptly removed once the conditions that prompted them have been satisfied.

§ 200.209 Certifications and representations.

Unless prohibited by the U.S. Constitution, Federal statutes, or regulations, a Federal agency or pass-through entity is authorized to require a recipient to submit annual certifications and representations. Submission may be required more frequently if a recipient or subrecipient fails to meet a requirement of a Federal award. When a recipient is provided an exception to the requirements of 2 CFR 25.110, the recipient must submit the appropriate assurance form (for example, SF-424B).

§ 200.210 Pre-award costs.

For requirements on costs incurred by the applicant prior to the start date of the period of performance of the Federal award, see § 200.458.

§ 200.211 Information contained in a Federal award.

The Federal award must include the following information:

(a) Federal award performance goals.  Where applicable, performance goals, indicators, targets, and baseline data must be included in the Federal award. The Federal agency must also specify in the terms and conditions of the Federal award how performance will be assessed, including the timing and scope of expected performance. See §§ 200.202 and 200.301 for more information on Federal award performance goals.

(b) General Federal award information.  The Federal agency must include the following information in each Federal award:

(1) Recipient Name (which must match the name associated with its unique entity identifier as defined at 2 CFR 25.400);

(2) Recipient's Unique Entity Identifier;

(3) Unique Federal Award Identification Number (FAIN);

(4) Federal Award Date (see Federal award date in § 200.1);

(5) Period of Performance Start and End Date;

(6) Budget Period Start and End Date;

(7) Amount of Federal Funds Obligated by this Action;

(8) Total Amount of Federal Funds Obligated;

(9) Total Approved Cost Sharing, where applicable;

(10) Total Amount of the Federal Award including approved Cost Sharing;

(11) Budget Approved by the Federal Agency;

(12) Federal Award Description (to comply with statutory requirements (for example, FFATA));

(13) Name of the Federal agency (including contact information for the awarding official);

(14) Assistance Listings Number and Title;

(15) Identification of whether the Award is R&D; and

(16) Indirect Cost Rate for the Federal award (including if the de minimis rate is charged per § 200.414).

(c) General terms and conditions. (1) Federal agencies must incorporate the following general terms and conditions either in the Federal award or by reference, as applicable:

(i) Administrative requirements.  Administrative requirements implemented by the Federal agency as specified in this part.

(ii) National policy requirements.  These include statutory, executive order, other Presidential directive, or regulatory requirements that apply by specific reference and are not program-specific. See § 200.300 Statutory and national policy requirements.

(iii) Recipient integrity and performance matters.  When the total Federal share of the Federal award may include more than $500,000 over the period of performance, the Federal agency must include the terms and conditions available in Appendix XII. See also § 200.113.

(iv) Future budget periods.  When it is anticipated that the period of performance will include multiple budget periods, the Federal agency must indicate that subsequent budget periods are subject to the availability of funds, program authority, satisfactory performance, and compliance with the terms and conditions of the Federal award.

(v) Termination provisions.  Federal agencies must inform recipients of the termination provisions in § 200.340, including the applicable termination provisions in the Federal agency's regulations or terms and conditions of the Federal award.

(2) The Federal award must incorporate, by reference, all general terms and conditions of the Federal award, which must be maintained on the Federal agency's website.

(3) The Federal agency must provide a copy of the full text of the general terms and conditions if a recipient requests it.

(4) The Federal agency must maintain an archive of previous versions of the general terms and conditions, with effective dates, for use by a recipient, auditors, or others. The archive should be located on the Federal agency's website in the same place where current terms and conditions are available.

(d) Federal award specific terms and conditions.  The Federal agency must include in each Federal award any specific terms and conditions that are in addition to the general terms and conditions. See also § 200.208. For loan and loan guarantee programs, the Federal agency must specify whether or not the Federal award has continuing compliance requirements. Whenever practicable, these specific terms and conditions should also be available on the Federal agency's website and in notices of funding opportunities (as outlined in § 200.204).

(e) Federal agency requirements.  Any other information required by the Federal agency.

§ 200.212 Public access to Federal award information.

(a) Except as noted in paragraph (c) of this section, the Federal agency must publish the required Federal award information on USAspending.gov in accordance with the guidance provided by OMB and the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Government-wide Spending Data Model (GSDM).

(b) All responsibility and qualification records posted in SAM.gov will be publicly available after a waiting period of 14 calendar days, except for:

(1) Past performance reviews required by Federal Government contractors (See Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) 48 CFR part 42, subpart 42.15);

(2) Information that was entered prior to April 15, 2011; or

(3) Information that is withdrawn during the 14-calendar day waiting period by a Federal agency.

(c) Nothing in this section may be construed as requiring the publication of information otherwise exempt under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552), or controlled unclassified information pursuant to Executive Order 13556.

§ 200.213 Reporting a determination that an applicant is not qualified for a Federal award.

(a) The Federal agency must report in SAM.gov if it does not make a Federal award to an applicant because it determines that the applicant does not meet the minimum qualification standards as described in § 200.206(a)(2). The Federal agency must report that determination only if all of the following apply:

(1) The only basis for the determination is the applicant's prior record of performance on administering Federal awards or its record of integrity and business ethics, as described in § 200.206(a)(2) (meaning, the applicant was determined to be qualified based on all factors other than those two standards); and

(2) The total Federal share of the Federal award was expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold over the period of performance.

(b) The Federal agency is not required to report a determination that an applicant is not qualified for a Federal award if they issue the Federal award in accordance with the requirements of § 200.208.

(c) If the Federal agency reports a determination that an applicant is not qualified for a Federal award, the Federal agency also must notify the applicant that:

(1) The determination was made and reported in SAM.gov. The notification from the Federal agency to the applicant should also provide a brief explanation for the determination;

(2) The information will be kept in the system for a period of five years from the date of the determination and then archived (See section 872 of Public Law 110-417, as amended, codified at 41 U.S.C. 2313);

(3) Each Federal agency that considers making a Federal award to the applicant during that five-year period will consider that information in determining the applicant's qualification to receive a Federal award when the total Federal share of a Federal award is expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold over the period of performance;

(4) The applicant may review the responsibility and qualification records accessible in SAM.gov and comment on any information the system contains about the applicant; and

(5) Federal agencies must consider the applicant's comments in determining whether the applicant is qualified for a future Federal award.

(d) If the Federal agency enters information into SAM.gov about a determination that an applicant is not qualified for a Federal award and subsequently:

(1) Learns that any of that information is erroneous, the Federal agency must correct the information in the system within three business days; and

(2) Obtains an update to that information that could be helpful to other Federal agencies, the Federal agency should amend the information in the system within 30 days.

(e) Federal agencies must not post any information that will be made publicly available in the non-public segment of the responsibility and qualification records that is covered by a disclosure exemption under the Freedom of Information Act. If a recipient asserts within seven calendar days to a Federal agency that some or all of the publicly available information is covered by a disclosure exemption under the Freedom of Information Act, the Federal agency that posted the information must remove the posting within seven calendar days of receiving the assertion. Prior to reposting the releasable information, the Federal agency must resolve the issue in accordance with the agency's Freedom of Information Act procedures.

§ 200.214 Suspension and debarment.

Recipients and subrecipients are subject to the nonprocurement debarment and suspension regulations implementing Executive Orders 12549 and 12689, as well as 2 CFR part 180. The regulations in 2 CFR part 180 restrict making Federal awards, subawards, and contracts with certain parties that are debarred, suspended, or otherwise excluded from receiving or participating in Federal awards.

§ 200.215 Never contract with the enemy.

Federal agencies, recipients, and subrecipients are subject to the guidance implementing Never Contract with the Enemy in 2 CFR part 183. The guidance in 2 CFR part 183 affects covered contracts, grants, and cooperative agreements that are expected to exceed $50,000 during the period of performance, are performed outside the United States and its territories, and are in support of a contingency operation in which members of the Armed Forces are actively engaged in hostilities.

§ 200.216 Prohibition on certain telecommunications and video surveillance equipment or services.

(a) Recipients and subrecipients are prohibited from obligating or expending loan or grant funds to:

(1) Procure or obtain covered telecommunications equipment or services;

(2) Extend or renew a contract to procure or obtain covered telecommunications equipment or services; or

(3) Enter into a contract (or extend or renew a contract) to procure or obtain covered telecommunications equipment or services.

(b) As described in section 889 of Public Law 115-232, “covered telecommunications equipment or services” means any of the following:

(1) Telecommunications equipment produced by Huawei Technologies Company or ZTE Corporation (or any subsidiary or affiliate of such entities);

(2) For the purpose of public safety, security of government facilities, physical security surveillance of critical infrastructure, and other national security purposes, video surveillance and telecommunications equipment produced by Hytera Communications Corporation, Hangzhou Hikvision Digital Technology Company, or Dahua Technology Company (or any subsidiary or affiliate of such entities);

(3) Telecommunications or video surveillance services provided by such entities or using such equipment;

(4) Telecommunications or video surveillance equipment or services produced or provided by an entity that the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the Director of the National Intelligence or the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, reasonably believes to be an entity owned or controlled by, or otherwise connected to, the government of a covered foreign country;

(c) For the purposes of this section, “covered telecommunications equipment or services” also include systems that use covered telecommunications equipment or services as a substantial or essential component of any system, or as critical technology as part of any system.

(d) In implementing the prohibition under section 889 of Public Law 115-232, heads of executive agencies administering loan, grant, or subsidy programs must prioritize available funding and technical support to assist affected businesses, institutions, and organizations as is reasonably necessary for those affected entities to transition from covered telecommunications equipment or services, to procure replacement equipment or services, and to ensure that communications service to users and customers is sustained.

(e) When the recipient or subrecipient accepts a loan or grant, it is certifying that it will comply with the prohibition on covered telecommunications equipment and services in this section. The recipient or subrecipient is not required to certify that funds will not be expended on covered telecommunications equipment or services beyond the certification provided upon accepting the loan or grant and those provided upon submitting payment requests and financial reports.

(f) For additional information, see section 889 of Public Law 115-232 and § 200.471.

§ 200.217 Whistleblower protections.

An employee of a recipient or subrecipient must not be discharged, demoted, or otherwise discriminated against as a reprisal for disclosing to a person or body described in paragraph (a)(2) of 41 U.S.C. 4712 information that the employee reasonably believes is evidence of gross mismanagement of a Federal contract or grant, a gross waste of Federal funds, an abuse of authority relating to a Federal contract or grant, a substantial and specific danger to public health or safety, or a violation of law, rule, or regulation related to a Federal contract (including the competition for or negotiation of a contract) or grant. The recipient and subrecipient must inform their employees in writing of employee whistleblower rights and protections under 41 U.S.C. 4712. See statutory requirements for whistleblower protections at 10 U.S.C. 4701, 41 U.S.C. 4712, 41 U.S.C. 4304, and 10 U.S.C. 4310.

Subpart D—Post Federal Award Requirements

§ 200.300 Statutory and national policy requirements.

(a) The Federal agency or pass-through entity must manage and administer the Federal award in a manner so as to ensure that Federal funding is expended and associated programs are implemented in full accordance with the U.S. Constitution, applicable Federal statutes and regulations—including provisions protecting free speech, religious liberty, public welfare, and the environment, and those prohibiting discrimination—and the requirements of this part. The Federal agency or pass-through entity must communicate to a recipient or subrecipient all relevant requirements, including those contained in general appropriations provisions, and incorporate them directly or by reference in the terms and conditions of the Federal award.

(b) In administering Federal awards that are subject to a Federal statute prohibiting discrimination based on sex, the Federal agency or pass-through entity must ensure that the award is administered in a way that does not unlawfully discriminate based on sexual orientation or gender identity if the statute's prohibition on sex discrimination encompasses discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity consistent with the Supreme Court's reasoning in Bostock v. Clayton County, 140 S. Ct. 1731 (2020).

(c) In administering awards in accordance with the U.S. Constitution, the Federal agency must take account of the heightened constitutional scrutiny that may apply under the Constitution's Equal Protection guarantee for government action that provides differential treatment based on protected characteristics.

§ 200.301 Performance measurement.

(a) The Federal agency must measure the recipient's performance to show achievement of program goals and objectives, share lessons learned, improve program outcomes, and foster the adoption of promising practices. The Federal agency should establish program goals and objectives during program planning and design (see § 200.202). The Federal agency should clearly communicate the specific program goals and objectives in the Federal award, including how the Federal agency will measure the achievement of the goals and objectives, the expected timeline, and information on how the recipient must report the achievement of program goals and objectives. The Federal agency should also clearly communicate in the Federal award any expected outcomes (such as outputs, service performance, or public impacts of any of these), indicators, targets, baseline data, or data collections that the recipient is responsible for measuring and reporting. The Federal agency must ensure all requirements for measuring performance align with the Federal agency's strategic goals, strategic objectives, or performance goals relevant to a program (see OMB Circular A-11, Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget Part 6).

(b) When establishing performance reporting frequency and content, the Federal agency should consider what information will be necessary to measure the recipient's progress, to identify promising practices of recipients, and build the evidence upon which the Federal agency makes program and performance decisions. The Federal agency should not require additional information that is not necessary for measuring program performance and evaluation. See § 200.329 for more information on reporting program performance.

(c) The Federal agency should also specify in the Federal award any requirements of the recipients' participation in federally funded evaluations.

§ 200.302 Financial management.

(a) Each State must expend and account for the Federal award in accordance with State laws and procedures for expending and accounting for the State's funds. All recipient and subrecipient financial management systems, including records documenting compliance with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award, must be sufficient to permit the preparation of reports required by the terms and conditions; and tracking expenditures to establish that funds have been used in accordance with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. See § 200.450.

(b) The recipient's and subrecipient's financial management system must provide for the following (see §§ 200.334, 200.335, 200.336, and 200.337):

(1) Identification of all Federal awards received and expended and the Federal programs under which they were received. Federal program and Federal award identification must include, as applicable, the Assistance Listings title and number, Federal award identification number, year the Federal award was issued, and name of the Federal agency or pass-through entity.

(2) Accurate, current, and complete disclosure of the financial results of each Federal award or program in accordance with the reporting requirements in §§ 200.328 and 200.329. When a Federal agency or pass-through entity requires reporting on an accrual basis from a recipient or subrecipient that maintains its records other than on an accrual basis, the recipient or subrecipient must not be required to establish an accrual accounting system. This recipient or subrecipient may develop accrual data for its reports based on an analysis of the documentation on hand.

(3) Maintaining records that sufficiently identify the amount, source, and expenditure of Federal funds for Federal awards. These records must contain information necessary to identify Federal awards, authorizations, financial obligations, unobligated balances, as well as assets, expenditures, income, and interest. All records must be supported by source documentation.

(4) Effective control over and accountability for all funds, property, and assets. The recipient or subrecipient must safeguard all assets and ensure they are used solely for authorized purposes. See § 200.303.

(5) Comparison of expenditures with budget amounts for each Federal award.

(6) Written procedures to implement the requirements of § 200.305.

(7) Written procedures for determining the allowability of costs in accordance with subpart E and the terms and conditions of the Federal award.

§ 200.303 Internal controls.

The recipient and subrecipient must:

(a) Establish, document, and maintain effective internal control over the Federal award that provides reasonable assurance that the recipient or subrecipient is managing the Federal award in compliance with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award. These internal controls should align with the guidance in “Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government” issued by the Comptroller General of the United States or the “Internal Control-Integrated Framework” issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).

(b) Comply with the U.S. Constitution, Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award.

(c) Evaluate and monitor the recipient's or subrecipient's compliance with statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards.

(d) Take prompt action when instances of noncompliance are identified.

(e) Take reasonable cybersecurity and other measures to safeguard information including protected personally identifiable information (PII) and other types of information. This also includes information the Federal agency or pass-through entity designates as sensitive or other information the recipient or subrecipient considers sensitive and is consistent with applicable Federal, State, local, and tribal laws regarding privacy and responsibility over confidentiality.

§ 200.304 Bonds.

(a) Where the Federal Government guarantees or insures the repayment of money borrowed by the recipient, the Federal agency may require adequate bonding and insurance if the bonding and insurance requirements of the recipient are not deemed adequate to protect the interest of the Federal Government.

(b) The Federal agency may require adequate fidelity bond coverage where the recipient lacks coverage to protect the interest of the Federal Government.

(c) Where bonds, insurance, or both are required in the situations described above, the bonds and insurance must be obtained from companies holding certificates of authority issued by the U.S. Department of Treasury (see 31 CFR part 223).

§ 200.305 Federal payment.

(a) Payments for States.  Payments for States are governed by Treasury-State Cash Management Improvement Act (CMIA) agreements and default procedures codified at 31 CFR part 205 and Treasury Financial Manual (TFM) 4A-2000, “Overall Disbursing Rules for All Federal Agencies.”

(b) Payments for recipients and subrecipients other than States.  For recipients and subrecipients other than States, payment methods must minimize the time elapsing between the transfer of funds from the Federal agency or the pass-through entity and the disbursement of funds by the recipient or subrecipient regardless of whether the payment is made by electronic funds transfer or by other means. See § 200.302(b)(6). Except as noted in this part, the Federal agency must require recipients to use only OMB-approved, government-wide information collections to request payment.

(1) The recipient or subrecipient must be paid in advance, provided it maintains or demonstrates the willingness to maintain both written procedures that minimize the time elapsing between the transfer of funds and disbursement by the recipient or subrecipient, and financial management systems that meet the standards for fund control and accountability as established in this part. Advance payments to a recipient or subrecipient must be limited to the minimum amounts needed and be timed with actual, immediate cash requirements of the recipient or subrecipient in carrying out the purpose of the approved program or project. The timing and amount of advance payments must be as close as is administratively feasible to the actual disbursements by the recipient or subrecipient for direct program or project costs and the proportionate share of any allowable indirect costs. The recipient or subrecipient must make timely payments to contractors in accordance with the contract provisions.

(2) Whenever possible, advance payment requests by the recipient or subrecipient must be consolidated to cover anticipated cash needs for all Federal awards received by the recipient from the awarding Federal agency or pass-through entity.

(i) Advance payment mechanisms must comply with 31 CFR part 208 and include, but are not limited to, Treasury checks and electronic funds transfers.

(ii) Recipients and subrecipients must be authorized to submit payment requests as often as necessary when electronic fund transfers are used or at least monthly when electronic transfers are not used. See Electronic Fund Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 1693-1693r).

(3) Reimbursement is preferred when the requirements in paragraph (b) cannot be met, when the Federal agency or pass-through entity sets a specific condition per § 200.208, when requested by the recipient or subrecipient, when a Federal award is for construction, or when a significant portion of the construction project is accomplished through private market financing or Federal loans and the Federal award constitutes a minor portion of the project. When the reimbursement method is used, the Federal agency or pass-through entity must make payment within 30 calendar days after receipt of the payment request unless the Federal agency or pass-through entity reasonably believes the request to be improper.

(4) If the recipient or subrecipient cannot meet the criteria for advance payments and the Federal agency or pass-through entity has determined that reimbursement is not feasible because the recipient or subrecipient lacks sufficient working capital, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may provide cash on a working capital advance basis. Under this procedure, the Federal agency or pass-through entity must advance cash payments to the recipient or subrecipient to cover its estimated disbursement needs for an initial period generally aligned to the recipient's or subrecipient's disbursing cycle. After that, the Federal agency or pass-through entity must reimburse the recipient or subrecipient for its actual cash disbursements. Use of the working capital advance payment method requires that the pass-through entity provide timely advance payments to any subrecipients to meet the subrecipient's actual cash disbursements. The pass-through entity must not use the working capital advance method of payment if the reason for using this method is the unwillingness or inability of the pass-through entity to provide timely advance payments to the subrecipient to meet the subrecipient's actual cash disbursements.

(5) If available, the recipient or subrecipient must disburse funds available from program income (including repayments to a revolving fund), rebates, refunds, contract settlements, audit recoveries, and interest earned on Federal funds before requesting additional cash payments.

(6) Payments for allowable costs must not be withheld at any time during the period of performance unless required by Federal statute, regulations, or in one of the following instances:

(i) The recipient or subrecipient has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of the Federal award; or

(ii) The recipient or subrecipient is delinquent in a debt to the United States as defined in OMB Circular A-129, “Policies for Federal Credit Programs and Non-Tax Receivables.” Under such conditions, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may, after providing reasonable notice, withhold payments to the recipient or subrecipient for financial obligations incurred after a specified date until the conditions are corrected or the debt is repaid to the Federal Government.

(7) A payment withheld for failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the Federal award must be released to the recipient or subrecipient upon subsequent compliance. When a Federal award is suspended, payment adjustments must be made in accordance with § 200.343.

(8) A payment must not be made to a recipient or subrecipient for amounts that the recipient or subrecipient withholds from contractors to assure satisfactory completion of work. Payment must be made when the recipient or subrecipient disburses the withheld funds to the contractors or to escrow accounts established to ensure satisfactory completion of work.

(9) The Federal agency or pass-through entity must not require separate depository accounts for funds provided to the recipient or subrecipient or establish any eligibility requirements for depositories. However, the recipient or subrecipient must be able to account for all Federal funds received, obligated, and expended.

(10) Advance payments of Federal funds must be deposited and maintained in insured accounts whenever possible.

(11) The recipient or subrecipient must maintain advance payments of Federal funds in interest-bearing accounts unless one of the following applies:

(i) The recipient or subrecipient receives less than $250,000 in Federal funding per year;

(ii) The best available interest-bearing account would not reasonably be expected to earn interest in excess of $500 per year on Federal cash balances;

(iii) The depository would require an average or minimum balance so high that it would not be feasible with the expected Federal and non-Federal cash resources;

(iv) A foreign government or banking system prohibits or precludes interest-bearing accounts; or

(v) An interest-bearing account is not readily accessible (for example, due to public or political unrest in a foreign country).

(12) The recipient or subrecipient may retain up to $500 per year of interest earned on Federal funds to use for administrative expenses of the recipient or subrecipient. Any additional interest earned on Federal funds must be returned annually to the Department of Health and Human Services Payment Management System (PMS) through either the Automated Clearing House (ACH) network or a Fedwire Funds Service payment. All interest in excess of $500 per year must be returned to PMS regardless of whether the recipient or subrecipient was paid through PMS. Instructions for returning interest can be found at https://pms.psc.gov/grant-recipients/returning-funds-interest.html.

(13) All other Federal funds must be returned to the payment system of the Federal agency. Returns should follow the instructions provided by the Federal agency. All returns to PMS should follow the instructions provided at https://pms.psc.gov/grant-recipients/returning-funds-interest.html.

§ 200.306 Cost sharing.

(a) Voluntary committed cost sharing is not expected under Federal research grants. The Federal agency may not use voluntary committed cost sharing as a factor during the merit review of applications or proposals for Federal research grants unless authorized by Federal statutes or agency regulations and specified in the notice of funding opportunity. Federal agencies are also discouraged from using voluntary committed cost sharing as a factor during the merit review of applications for other Federal financial assistance programs. If voluntary committed cost sharing is used for this purpose for other programs, the notice of funding opportunity must specify how an applicant's proposed cost sharing will be considered. See §§ 200.414, 200.204, and Appendix I.

(b) For all Federal awards, the Federal agency or pass-through entity must accept any cost sharing funds (including cash and third-party in-kind contributions, and also including funds committed by the recipient, subrecipient, or third parties) as part of the recipient's or subrecipient's contributions to a program when the funds:

(1) Are verifiable in the recipient's or subrecipient's records;

(2) Are not included as contributions for any other Federal award;

(3) Are necessary and reasonable for achieving the objectives of the Federal award;

(4) Are allowable under subpart E;

(5) Are not paid by the Federal Government under another Federal award, except where the program's Federal authorizing statute specifically provides that Federal funds made available for the program can be applied to cost sharing requirements of other Federal programs;

(6) Are provided for in the approved budget when required by the Federal agency; and

(7) Conform to other applicable provisions of this part.

(c) Unrecovered indirect costs, including indirect costs on cost sharing, may be included as part of cost sharing with the prior approval of the Federal agency or pass-through entity. Unrecovered indirect cost means the difference between the amount charged to the Federal award and the amount which could have been charged to the Federal award under the recipient's or subrecipient's approved indirect cost rate.

(d) Values for recipient or subrecipient contributions of services and property must be established in accordance with the cost principles in subpart E. When a Federal agency or pass-through entity authorizes the recipient or subrecipient to donate buildings or land for construction/facilities acquisition projects or long-term use, the value of the donated property for cost sharing must be the lesser of paragraph (d)(1) or (2) below.

(1) The value of the remaining life of the property recorded in the recipient's or subrecipient's accounting records at the time of donation.

(2) The current fair market value. However, when there is sufficient justification, the Federal agency or pass-through may approve using the current fair market value of the donated property, even if it exceeds the value described in paragraph (d)(1) at the time of donation.

(e) Volunteer services furnished by third-party professional and technical personnel, consultants, and other labor may be counted as cost sharing if the service is necessary for the program. Rates for third-party volunteer services must be consistent with those paid for similar work by the recipient or subrecipient. When the required skills are not found in the recipient's or subrecipient's workforce, rates must be consistent with those paid for similar work in the labor market where the recipient or subrecipient competes for the services involved. In either case, fringe benefits that are allowable, allocable, and reasonable may be included in the valuation.

(f) When a third-party organization furnishes the services of an employee, these services must be valued at the employee's regular rate of pay plus an amount of fringe benefits that is reasonable, necessary, allocable, and otherwise allowable, and indirect costs at either the third-party organization's approved federally-negotiated indirect cost rate or, a rate in accordance with § 200.414(d) provided these services employ the same skill(s) for which the employee is normally paid. Where donated services are treated as indirect costs, indirect cost rates will separate the value of the donated services so that reimbursement for the donated services will not be made.

(g) Donated property from third parties may include items such as equipment, office supplies, laboratory supplies, or workshop and classroom supplies. The assessed value of donated property included as cost sharing must not exceed the property's fair market value at the time of the donation.

(h) The method used for determining the value of donated equipment, buildings, and land for which title passes to the recipient or subrecipient may differ according to the following:

(1) If the purpose of the Federal award is to assist the recipient or subrecipient in acquiring equipment, buildings, or land, the aggregate value of the donated property may be claimed as cost sharing.

(2) If the purpose of the Federal award is to support activities that require the use of equipment, buildings, or land, only depreciation charges for equipment and buildings may be made. However, the fair market value of equipment or other capital assets and fair rental charges for land may be allowed if provided in the terms and conditions of the Federal award. See § 200.420.

(i) The value of donated property must be determined in accordance with the accounting policies of the recipient or subrecipient with the following qualifications:

(1) The value of donated land and buildings must not exceed its fair market value at the time of donation to the recipient or subrecipient as established by an independent appraiser (for example, certified real property appraiser or General Services Administration representative) and certified by a responsible official of the recipient or subrecipient as required by the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended, (42 U.S.C. 4601-4655) except as provided in the implementing regulations at 49 CFR part 24, “Uniform Relocation Assistance And Real Property Acquisition For Federal And Federally-Assisted Programs.”

(2) The value of donated equipment must not exceed the fair market value at the time of donation.

(3) The value of donated space must not exceed the fair rental value of comparable space as established by an independent appraisal of comparable space and facilities in a privately-owned building in the same locality.

(4) The value of loaned equipment must not exceed its fair rental value.

(j) The fair market value of third-party in-kind contributions must be documented and, to the extent feasible, supported by the same methods used internally by the recipient or subrecipient.

(k) For institutions of higher education (IHE), voluntary uncommitted cost sharing should be treated differently from mandatory or voluntary committed cost sharing. Voluntary uncommitted cost sharing should not be included in the organized research base for computing the indirect cost rate or reflected in any allocation of indirect costs. Voluntary uncommitted cost sharing includes faculty-donated additional time above that agreed to as part of the award. See OMB memorandum M-01-06, dated January 5, 2001, Clarification of OMB A-21 Treatment of Voluntary Uncommitted Cost Sharing and Tuition Remission Costs.

§ 200.307 Program income.

(a) General.  The recipient or subrecipient is encouraged to earn income to defray program costs when appropriate. Program income must be used for the original purpose of the Federal award. Program income earned during the period of performance may only be used for costs incurred during the period of performance or allowable closeout costs. See § 200.472(b). Program income must be expended prior to requesting additional Federal funds. Program income exceeding amounts specified in the Federal award may be added to or deducted from the total allowable costs in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Federal award.

(b) Use of program income.  There are three methods of applying program income: deduction; addition; and cost-sharing. The Federal agency should specify what program income method(s) will be used in the terms and conditions of the Federal award. The deduction method will be used if the Federal agency does not specify a method for applying program income. When no program income method is specified in the Federal award, prior approval is required to use the addition or cost sharing methods. However, the addition method will be used when no method is specified for awards made to institutions of higher education (IHE) and nonprofit research institutions. In specifying alternatives to the deduction and addition methods, the Federal agency may distinguish between income earned by the recipient and income earned by subrecipients as well as between the sources, kinds, or amounts of income.

(1) Deduction.  Program income is deducted from the total allowable costs, reducing the overall total amount of the Federal award.

(2) Addition.  Program income is added to the total allowable costs, increasing the overall total amount of the Federal award.

(3) Cost sharing.  Program income is used to meet the Federal award's cost sharing requirement.

(c) Income after the period of performance.  There are no requirements governing the disposition of program income earned after the end of the period of performance of the Federal award unless stipulated in the Federal agency regulations or the terms and conditions of the Federal award. The Federal agency may negotiate agreements with recipients regarding appropriate uses of income earned after the end of the period of performance as part of the closeout process. See § 200.344.

(d) Cost of generating program income.  If authorized by Federal regulations or the Federal award, costs incidental to generating program income may be deducted from gross income to determine program income, provided these costs have not been charged to the Federal award.

(e) Not considered program income.  The following are not considered program income unless specified in Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of the Federal award:

(1) Governmental revenues.  Taxes, special assessments, levies, fines, and similar revenues the recipient or subrecipient raised.

(2) Property.  Proceeds from the sale of real property, equipment, or supplies. The proceeds must be handled in accordance with the requirements of the Property Standards of §§ 200.311, 200.313, 200.314, or as explicitly identified in Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of the Federal award.

(3) License fees and royalties.  License fees and royalties for copyrighted material, patents, patent applications, trademarks, and inventions made under the Federal award subject to 37 CFR part 401.

§ 200.308 Revision of budget and program plans.

(a) Approved budget in general.  The approved budget for the Federal award summarizes the financial aspects of the project or program as approved during the Federal award process. It may include the Federal share and non-Federal share or only the Federal share, as determined by the Federal agency or pass-through entity.

(b) Deviations from approved budget.  The recipient or subrecipient must report deviations from the approved budget, project or program scope, or objective(s) in accordance with § 200.329. The recipient or subrecipient must request prior approvals from the Federal agency or pass-through entity for budget and program plan revisions in accordance with this section.

(c) Requesting approval for budget revisions.  When requesting approval for budget revisions, the recipient or subrecipient must use the same format for budget information that was used in their application, except if the Federal agency has approved an alternative format. Alternative formats may include the use of electronic systems, email, or other agency-approved mechanisms that document the request.

(d) Federal agency or pass-through entity review.  The Federal agency or pass-through entity must review the request for budget or program plan revision and should notify the recipient or subrecipient whether the revisions have been approved within 30 days of receipt of the request. The Federal agency or pass-through entity must inform the recipient or subrecipient in writing when a decision can be expected if more than 30 days is required for a review.

(e) Limitation on other prior approval requirements.  Unless specified in this guidance, the Federal agency must not impose additional prior approval requirements without OMB approval. See also §§ 200.102 and 200.407.

(f) Revisions Requiring Prior Approval.  A recipient or subrecipient must request prior written approval from the Federal agency or pass-through entity for the following program and budget-related reasons:

(1) Change in the scope or the objective of the project or program (even if there is no associated budget revision requiring prior written approval).

(2) Change in key personnel (including employees and contractors) that are identified by name or position in the Federal award.

(3) The disengagement from a project for more than three months, or a 25 percent reduction in time and effort devoted to the Federal award over the course of the period of performance, by the approved project director or principal investigator.

(4) The inclusion, unless waived by the Federal agency, of costs that require prior approval in accordance with subpart E as applicable.

(5) The transfer of funds budgeted for participant support costs to other budget categories.

(6) Subaward activities not proposed in the application and approved in the Federal award. A change of subrecipient only requires prior approval if the Federal agency or pass-through entity includes the requirement in the terms and conditions of the Federal award. In general, a Federal agency or pass-through entity should not require prior approval of a change of subrecipient unless the inclusion was a determining factor in the merit review or eligibility process. This requirement does not apply to procurement transactions for goods and services.

(7) Changes in the total approved cost-sharing amount.

(8) The need arises for additional Federal funds to complete the project. Before providing approval, the Federal agency must ensure that adequate funds are available to avoid a violation of the Antideficiency Act.

(9) Transferring funds between the construction and non-construction work under a Federal award.

(10) A no-cost extension (meaning, an extension of time that does not require the obligation of additional Federal funds) of the period of performance, other than any one-time extension authorized by the Federal agency in accordance with paragraph (g)(2). All requests for no-cost extensions should be submitted at least 10 calendar days before the conclusion of the period of performance. The Federal agency may approve multiple no-cost extensions under a Federal award if not prohibited by Federal statute or regulation.

(g) Waiver of certain prior approvals.  Except for the requirements listed in paragraphs (f)(1) through (10), the Federal agency is authorized to waive other cost-related and administrative prior written approval requirements contained in subparts D and E. Such waivers may include authorizing recipients to do one or more of the following:

(1) Pre-award costs.  Incur project costs 90 calendar days before the Federal award date. Expenses incurred more than 90 calendar days before the Federal award date require prior approval of the Federal agency. All costs incurred before the Federal award date are at the recipient's own risk (for example, the Federal agency is not required to reimburse such costs if the recipient does not receive the Federal award or if the Federal award is less than anticipated and inadequate to cover such costs). Pre-award costs must be charged to the initial budget period of the Federal award unless otherwise specified by the Federal agency. See also § 200.458.

(2) One-time extensions.  Initiate a one-time extension of the period of performance by up to 12 months unless one or more of the conditions outlined in paragraphs (g)(2)(i) through (iii) of this section apply. Prior approval is not required if a recipient is authorized in the terms and conditions of the Federal award to initiate a one-time extension. However, the recipient must notify the Federal agency in writing with the supporting justification and a revised period of performance at least 10 calendar days before the conclusion of the period of performance. A one-time extension may not be exercised for the sole purpose of using unobligated balances. This paragraph does not preclude the Federal agency from approving further no-cost extensions to the Federal award. One-time extensions require prior approval from the Federal agency when:

(i) The terms and conditions of the Federal award prohibit the extension;

(ii) The extension requires additional Federal funds; or

(iii) The extension involves any change in the approved scope of the project.

(3) Unobligated Balances.  Carry forward unobligated balances to subsequent budget periods.

(h) Prior approvals for research awards.  The prior approval requirements for the actions described in paragraph (g) of this section are automatically waived for Federal awards that support research unless stipulated in the Federal agency's regulations or terms and conditions of the Federal award. However, one-time extensions require the Federal agency's prior approval when one of the conditions in paragraph (g)(2) of this section applies.

(i) Transfer of funds.  The Federal agency must not permit a transfer of funds that would cause any Federal appropriation to be used for purposes other than those consistent with the appropriation. The Federal agency may also, at its option, restrict the transfer of funds among direct cost categories (for example, personnel, travel, and supplies) or programs, functions, and activities when:

(1) The Federal share of the Federal award exceeds the simplified acquisition threshold; and

(2) The cumulative amount of a transfer exceeds or is expected to exceed 10 percent of the total budget, including cost share, as last approved by the Federal agency.

§ 200.309 Modifications to Period of Performance.

When the Federal agency or pass-through entity approves an extension to a Federal award, or if a recipient extends under § 200.308(g)(2), the period of performance will be amended to end at the completion of the extension. If termination occurs, the period of performance will be amended to end upon the effective date of termination. The start date of a renewal award begins a new and distinct period of performance.

Property Standards

§ 200.310 Insurance coverage.

The recipient or subrecipient must, at a minimum, provide the equivalent insurance coverage for real property and equipment acquired or improved with Federal funds as provided to property and equipment owned by the recipient or subrecipient. Insurance is not required for Federally owned property unless required by the terms and conditions of the Federal award.

§ 200.311 Real property.

(a) Title.  Subject to the requirements and conditions set forth in this section, title to real property acquired or improved under the Federal award will vest upon acquisition in the recipient or subrecipient.

(b) Use.  Except as otherwise provided by Federal statutes or the Federal agency, real property must be used for the originally authorized purpose as long as it is needed for that purpose. While the property is being used for the originally authorized purpose, the recipient or subrecipient must not dispose of or encumber its title or other interests except as provided by the Federal agency. Easements for utility, cable, and similar services that benefit the real property and are consistent with the authorized use are not considered an encumbrance.

(c) Appraisals.  When an appraisal of real property is required and obtained by the recipient or subrecipient, it must be conducted by an independent appraiser (for example, certified real property appraiser or General Services Administration representative) and certified by a responsible official of the recipient or subrecipient as required by the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended, (42 U.S.C. 4601-4655) except as provided in the implementing regulations at 49 CFR part 24, “Uniform Relocation Assistance And Real Property Acquisition For Federal And Federally-Assisted Programs.”

(d) Disposition.  When real property is no longer needed for the originally authorized purpose, the recipient or subrecipient must obtain disposition instructions from the Federal agency or pass-through entity. The instructions must specify one of the following disposition methods:

(1) Retain title after compensating the Federal agency.  When the recipient or subrecipient retains title to the property, it must pay the Federal agency an amount calculated by multiplying the percentage of the Federal agency's contribution towards the original purchase (and costs of any improvements) by the current fair market value of the property. However, in situations where the recipient or subrecipient is disposing of real property acquired or improved with the Federal award and acquiring replacement real property under the same Federal award, the net proceeds from the disposition may be used as an offset to the cost of the replacement property.

(2) Sell the property and compensate the Federal agency.  When a recipient or subrecipient sells the property, it must pay the Federal agency an amount calculated by multiplying the percentage of the Federal agency's contribution towards the original purchase (and cost of any improvements) by the proceeds of the sale after deducting any actual and reasonable expenses paid to sell or fix up the property for sale. When the Federal award has not been closed out, the net proceeds from the sale may be offset against the original cost of the property. When directed to sell the property, the recipient or subrecipient must sell the property utilizing procedures that provide for competition to the extent practicable and that result in the highest possible return.

(3) Transfer title to the Federal agency or a third party designated/approved by the Federal agency.  When a recipient or subrecipient transfers title to the property to a Federal agency or third party designated or approved by the Federal agency, the recipient or subrecipient is entitled to be paid an amount calculated by multiplying the percentage of the recipient's or subrecipient's contribution towards the original purchase of the real property (and cost of any improvements) by the current fair market value of the property.

§ 200.312 Federally owned and exempt property.

(a) Title to Federally owned property remains vested in the Federal Government. The recipient or subrecipient must submit an inventory listing of Federally owned property in its custody to the Federal agency or pass-through entity on an annual basis. The recipient or subrecipient must request disposition instructions from the Federal agency or pass-through entity upon completion of the Federal award or when the property is no longer needed.

(b) If the Federal agency has no further need for the property, it must declare the property excess and report it for disposal to the appropriate Federal disposal authority unless the Federal agency has statutory authority to dispose of the property by alternative methods (for example, the authority provided by the Federal Technology Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 3710(i)). The Federal agency or pass-through entity must issue appropriate instructions to the recipient or subrecipient.

(c) Exempt property means property acquired under the Federal award where the Federal agency has chosen to vest title to the property to the recipient or subrecipient without further responsibility to the Federal Government. The Federal agency may only exercise this option when permitted by Federal statute and set forth in the terms and conditions of the Federal award. Absent statutory authority and specific terms and conditions of the Federal award, the title to exempt property acquired under the Federal award remains with the Federal Government.

§ 200.313 Equipment.

See also § 200.439.

(a) Title.  Title to equipment acquired under the Federal award will vest upon acquisition in the recipient or subrecipient subject to the conditions of this section. This title must be a conditional title unless a Federal statute specifically authorizes the Federal agency to vest title in the recipient or subrecipient without further responsibility to the Federal Government (and the Federal agency elects to do so). A conditional title means a clear title is withheld by the Federal agency until conditions and requirements specified in the terms and conditions of a Federal award have been fulfilled. Title for equipment vested in a recipient or subrecipient is subject to the following conditions:

(1) Use the equipment for the authorized purposes of the project during the period of performance or until the property is no longer needed for the purposes of the project.

(2) While the equipment is being used for the originally-authorized purpose, the recipient or subrecipient must not dispose of or encumber its title or other interests without the approval of the Federal agency or pass-through entity.

(3) Use and dispose of the property in accordance with paragraphs (b), (c), and (e) of this section.

(b) General.  A State must use, manage and dispose of equipment acquired under a Federal award in accordance with State laws and procedures. Indian Tribes must use, manage, and dispose of equipment acquired under a Federal award in accordance with tribal laws and procedures. If such laws and procedures do not exist, Indian Tribes must follow the guidance in this section. Other recipients and subrecipients, including subrecipients of a State or Indian Tribe, must follow paragraphs (c) through (e) of this section.

(c) Use. (1) The recipient or subrecipient must use equipment for the project or program for which it was acquired and for as long as needed, whether or not the project or program continues to be supported by the Federal award. The recipient or subrecipient must not encumber the equipment without prior approval of the Federal agency or pass-through entity. The Federal agency may require the submission of the applicable common forms for reporting on equipment. When no longer needed for the original project or program, the equipment may be used in other activities in the following order of priority:

(i) Activities under other Federal awards from the Federal agency that funded the original program or project; then

(ii) Activities under Federal awards from other Federal agencies. These activities include consolidated equipment for information technology systems.

(2) During the time that equipment is used on the project or program for which it was acquired, the recipient or subrecipient must also make the equipment available for use on other programs or projects supported by the Federal Government, provided that such use will not interfere with the purpose for which it was originally acquired. First preference for other use of the equipment must be given to other programs or projects supported by the Federal agency that financed the equipment. Second preference must be given to programs or projects under Federal awards from other Federal agencies. Use for non-federally-funded projects is also permissible, provided such use will not interfere with the purpose for which it was originally acquired. The recipient or subrecipient should consider charging user fees as appropriate.

(3) Notwithstanding the encouragement in § 200.307 to earn program income, the recipient or subrecipient must not use equipment acquired with the Federal award to provide services for a fee that is less than a private company would charge for similar services unless specifically authorized by Federal statute. This restriction is effective as long as the Federal Government retains an interest in the equipment.

(4) When acquiring replacement equipment, the recipient or subrecipient may either trade-in or sell the equipment and use the proceeds to offset the cost of the replacement equipment.

(d) Management requirements.  Regardless of whether equipment is acquired in part or its entirety under the Federal award, the recipient or subrecipient must manage equipment (including replacement equipment) utilizing procedures that meet the following requirements:

(1) Property records must include a description of the property, a serial number or another identification number, the source of funding for the property (including the FAIN), the title holder, the acquisition date, the cost of the property, the percentage of the Federal agency contribution towards the original purchase, the location, use and condition of the property, and any disposition data including the date of disposal and sale price of the property. The recipient and subrecipient are responsible for maintaining and updating property records when there is a change in the status of the property.

(2) A physical inventory of the property must be conducted, and the results must be reconciled with the property records at least once every two years.

(3) A control system must be in place to ensure safeguards for preventing property loss, damage, or theft. Any loss, damage, or theft of equipment must be investigated. The recipient or subrecipient must notify the Federal agency or pass-through entity of any loss, damage, or theft of equipment that will have an impact on the program.

(4) Regular maintenance procedures must be in place to ensure the property is in proper working condition.

(5) If the recipient or subrecipient is authorized or required to sell the property, proper sales procedures must be in place to ensure the highest possible return.

(e) Disposition.  When equipment acquired under a Federal award is no longer needed for the original project, program, or for other activities currently or previously supported by a Federal agency, the recipient or subrecipient must request disposition instructions from the Federal agency or pass-through entity if required by the terms and conditions of the Federal award. Disposition of the equipment will be made as follows, in accordance with Federal agency or pass-through entity disposition instructions:

(1) Equipment with a current fair market value of $10,000 or less (per unit) may be retained, sold, or otherwise disposed of with no further responsibility to the Federal agency or pass-through entity.

(2) Except as provided in § 200.312(b), or if the Federal agency or pass-through entity fails to provide requested disposition instructions within 120 days, items of equipment with a current fair market value in excess of $10,000 (per-unit) may be retained or sold by the recipient or subrecipient. However, the Federal agency is entitled to an amount calculated by multiplying the percentage of the Federal agency's contribution towards the original purchase by the current market value or proceeds from the sale. If the equipment is sold, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may permit the recipient or subrecipient to retain, from the Federal share, $1,000 of the proceeds to cover expenses associated with the selling and handling of the equipment.

(3) The recipient or subrecipient may transfer title to the property to the Federal Government or to an eligible third party provided that the recipient or subrecipient must be entitled to compensation for its attributable percentage of the current fair market value of the property.

(4) In cases where a recipient or subrecipient fails to take appropriate disposition actions, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may direct the recipient or subrecipient to take disposition actions.

(f) Equipment retention.  When included in the terms and conditions of the Federal award, the Federal agency may permit the recipient to retain equipment, or authorize a pass-through entity to permit the subrecipient to retain equipment, with no further obligation to the Federal Government unless prohibited by Federal statute or regulation.

§ 200.314 Supplies.

See also § 200.453.

(a) Title to supplies acquired under the Federal award will vest upon acquisition in the recipient or subrecipient. When there is a residual inventory of unused supplies exceeding $10,000 in aggregate value at the end of the period of performance, and the supplies are not needed for any other Federal award, the recipient or subrecipient may retain or sell the unused supplies. Unused supplies means supplies that are in new condition, not having been used or opened before. The aggregate value of unused supplies consists of all supply types, not just like-item supplies. The Federal agency or pass-through entity is entitled to compensation in an amount calculated by multiplying the percentage of the Federal agency's or pass-through entity's contribution towards the cost of the original purchase(s) by the current market value or proceeds from the sale. If the supplies are sold, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may permit the recipient or subrecipient to retain, from the Federal share, $1,000 of the proceeds to cover expenses associated with the selling and handling of the supplies.

(b) Unless expressly authorized by Federal statute, the recipient or subrecipient must not use supplies acquired with the Federal award to provide services for a fee that is less than a private company would charge for similar services. This restriction is effective as long as the Federal Government retains an interest in the supplies or as authorized by Federal statute.

§ 200.315 Intangible property.

(a) Title to intangible property acquired under a Federal award vests upon acquisition in the recipient or subrecipient. The recipient or subrecipient must use that intangible property for the originally authorized purpose and must not encumber the property without the approval of the Federal agency or pass-through entity. When no longer needed for the originally authorized purpose, disposition of the intangible property must occur in accordance with the provisions in § 200.313(e).

(b) To the extent permitted by law, the recipient or subrecipient may copyright any work that is subject to copyright and was developed, or for which ownership was acquired, under a Federal award. The Federal agency reserves a royalty-free, nonexclusive, and irrevocable right to reproduce, publish, or otherwise use the work for Federal purposes and to authorize others to do so. This includes the right to require recipients and subrecipients to make such works available through agency-designated public access repositories.

(c) The recipient or subrecipient is subject to applicable regulations governing patents and inventions, including government-wide regulations in 37 CFR part 401.

(d) The Federal Government has the right to:

(1) Obtain, reproduce, publish, or otherwise use the data produced under a Federal award; and

(2) Authorize others to receive, reproduce, publish, or otherwise use the data for Federal purposes.

(e) (1) The recipient or subrecipient must provide research data relating to published research findings produced under the Federal award and that were used by the Federal Government in developing an agency action that has the force and effect of law if requested by the Federal agency in response to a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request. When the Federal agency obtains the research data solely in response to a FOIA request, the Federal agency may charge the requester a fee for the cost of obtaining the research data. This fee should reflect the costs incurred by the Federal agency and the recipient or subrecipient. This fee is in addition to any fees the Federal agency may assess under the FOIA (5 U.S.C. 552(a)(4)(A)).

(2) Published research findings mean:

(i) Research findings published in a peer-reviewed scientific or technical journal; or

(ii) Research findings publicly cited by a Federal agency in developing an agency action that has the force and effect of law.

(3) Research data means the recorded factual material commonly accepted in the scientific community as necessary to validate research findings. Research data does not include any of the following:

(i) Preliminary analyses, drafts of scientific papers, plans for future research, peer reviews, or communications with colleagues. This “recorded” material excludes physical objects (for example, laboratory samples).

(ii) Trade secrets, commercial information, materials necessary to be held confidential by a researcher until they are published, or similar information which is protected under law; and

(iii) Personnel, medical, and other personally identifiable information that, if disclosed, would constitute an invasion of personal privacy. Information that could identify a particular person in a research study is not considered research data.

(f) Federal agencies should work with recipients to maximize public access to Federally funded research results and data in a manner that protects data providers' confidentiality, privacy, and security. Agencies should provide guidance to recipients to make restricted-access data available through a variety of mechanisms. FOIA may not be the most appropriate mechanism for providing access to intangible property, including Federally funded research results and data.

§ 200.316 Property trust relationship.

Real property, equipment, and intangible property acquired or improved with the Federal award must be held in trust by the recipient or subrecipient as trustee for the beneficiaries of the project or program under which the property was acquired or improved. The Federal agency or pass-through entity may require the recipient or subrecipient to record liens or other appropriate notices of record to indicate that personal or real property has been acquired or improved with a Federal award and that use and disposition conditions apply to the property.

Procurement Standards

§ 200.317 Procurements by States and Indian Tribes.

When conducting procurement transactions under a Federal award, a State or Indian Tribe must follow the same policies and procedures it uses for procurements with non-Federal funds. If such policies and procedures do not exist, States and Indian Tribes must follow the procurement standards in §§ 200.318 through 200.327. In addition to its own policies and procedures, a State or Indian Tribe must also comply with the following procurement standards: §§ 200.321, 200.322, 200.323, and 200.327. All other recipients and subrecipients, including subrecipients of a State or Indian Tribe, must follow the procurement standards in §§ 200.318 through 200.327.

§ 200.318 General procurement standards.

(a) Documented procurement procedures.  The recipient or subrecipient must maintain and use documented procedures for procurement transactions under a Federal award or subaward, including for acquisition of property or services. These documented procurement procedures must be consistent with State, local, and tribal laws and regulations and the standards identified in §§ 200.317 through 200.327.

(b) Oversight of contractors.  Recipients and subrecipients must maintain oversight to ensure that contractors perform in accordance with the terms, conditions, and specifications of their contracts or purchase orders. See also § 200.501(h).

(c) Conflicts of interest. (1) The recipient or subrecipient must maintain written standards of conduct covering conflicts of interest and governing the actions of its employees engaged in the selection, award, and administration of contracts. No employee, officer, agent, or board member with a real or apparent conflict of interest may participate in the selection, award, or administration of a contract supported by the Federal award. A conflict of interest includes when the employee, officer, agent, or board member, any member of their immediate family, their partner, or an organization that employs or is about to employ any of the parties indicated herein, has a financial or other interest in or a tangible personal benefit from an entity considered for a contract. An employee, officer, agent, and board member of the recipient or subrecipient may neither solicit nor accept gratuities, favors, or anything of monetary value from contractors. However, the recipient or subrecipient may set standards for situations where the financial interest is not substantial or a gift is an unsolicited item of nominal value. The recipient's or subrecipient's standards of conduct must also provide for disciplinary actions to be applied for violations by its employees, officers, agents, or board members.

(2) If the recipient or subrecipient has a parent, affiliate, or subsidiary organization that is not a State, local government, or Indian Tribe, the recipient or subrecipient must also maintain written standards of conduct covering organizational conflicts of interest. Organizational conflicts of interest mean that because of relationships with a parent company, affiliate, or subsidiary organization, the recipient or subrecipient is unable or appears to be unable to be impartial in conducting a procurement action involving a related organization.

(d) Avoidance of unnecessary or duplicative items.  The recipient's or subrecipient's procedures must avoid the acquisition of unnecessary or duplicative items. Consideration should be given to consolidating or breaking out procurements to obtain a more economical purchase. When appropriate, an analysis should be made between leasing and purchasing property or equipment to determine the most economical approach.

(e) Procurement arrangements using strategic sourcing.  When appropriate for the procurement or use of common or shared goods and services, recipients and subrecipients are encouraged to enter into State and local intergovernmental agreements or inter-entity agreements for procurement transactions. These or similar procurement arrangements using strategic sourcing may foster greater economy and efficiency. Documented procurement actions of this type (using strategic sourcing, shared services, and other similar procurement arrangements) will meet the competition requirements of this part.

(f) Use of excess and surplus Federal property.  The recipient or subrecipient is encouraged to use excess and surplus Federal property instead of purchasing new equipment and property when it is feasible and reduces project costs.

(g) Use of value engineering clauses.  When practical, the recipient or subrecipient is encouraged to use value engineering clauses in contracts for construction projects of sufficient size to offer reasonable opportunities for cost reductions. Value engineering means analyzing each contract item or task to ensure its essential function is provided at the overall lowest cost.

(h) Responsible contractors.  The recipient or subrecipient must award contracts only to responsible contractors that possess the ability to perform successfully under the terms and conditions of a proposed contract. The recipient or subrecipient must consider contractor integrity, public policy compliance, proper classification of employees (see the Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. 201, chapter 8), past performance record, and financial and technical resources when conducting a procurement transaction. See also § 200.214.

(i) Procurement records.  The recipient or subrecipient must maintain records sufficient to detail the history of each procurement transaction. These records must include the rationale for the procurement method, contract type selection, contractor selection or rejection, and the basis for the contract price.

(j) Time-and-materials type contracts. (1) The recipient or subrecipient may use a time-and-materials type contract only after a determination that no other contract is suitable and if the contract includes a ceiling price that the contractor exceeds at its own risk. Time-and-materials type contract means a contract whose cost to a recipient or subrecipient is the sum of:

(i) The actual cost of materials; and

(ii) Direct labor hours charged at fixed hourly rates that reflect wages, general and administrative expenses, and profit.

(2) Because this formula generates an open-ended contract price, a time-and-materials contract provides no positive profit incentive to the contractor for cost control or labor efficiency. Therefore, each contract must set a ceiling price that the contractor exceeds at its own risk. Further, the recipient or subrecipient awarding such a contract must assert a high degree of oversight to obtain reasonable assurance that the contractor is using efficient methods and effective cost controls.

(k) Settlement of contractual and administrative issues.  The recipient or subrecipient is responsible for the settlement of all contractual and administrative issues arising out of its procurement transactions. These issues include, but are not limited to, source evaluation, protests, disputes, and claims. These standards do not relieve the recipient or subrecipient of any contractual responsibilities under its contracts. The Federal agency will not substitute its judgment for that of the recipient or subrecipient unless the matter is primarily a Federal concern. The recipient or subrecipient must report violations of law to the Federal, State, or local authority with proper jurisdiction.

(l) Examples of labor and employment practices. (1) The procurement standards in this subpart do not prohibit recipients or subrecipients from:

(i) Using Project Labor Agreements (PLAs) or similar forms of pre-hire collective bargaining agreements;

(ii) Requiring construction contractors to use hiring preferences or goals for people residing in high-poverty areas, disadvantaged communities as defined by the Justice40 Initiative (see OMB Memorandum M-21-28), or high-unemployment census tracts within a region no smaller than the county where a federally funded construction project is located. The hiring preferences or goals should be consistent with the policies and procedures of the recipient or subrecipient, and must not prohibit interstate hiring;

(iii) Requiring a contractor to use hiring preferences or goals for individuals with barriers to employment (as defined in section 3 of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3102(24)), including women and people from underserved communities as defined by Executive Order 14091;

(iv) Using agreements intended to ensure uninterrupted delivery of services; using agreements intended to ensure community benefits; or

(v) Offering employees of a predecessor contractor rights of first refusal under a new contract.

(2) Recipients and subrecipients may use the practices listed in paragraph (1) if consistent with the U.S. Constitution, applicable Federal statutes and regulations, the objectives and purposes of the applicable Federal financial assistance program, and other requirements of this part.

§ 200.319 Competition.

(a) All procurement transactions under the Federal award must be conducted in a manner that provides full and open competition and is consistent with the standards of this section and § 200.320.

(b) To ensure objective contractor performance and eliminate unfair competitive advantage, contractors that develop or draft specifications, requirements, statements of work, or invitations for bids must be excluded from competing on those procurements.

(c) Examples of situations that may restrict competition include, but are not limited to:

(1) Placing unreasonable requirements on firms for them to qualify to do business;

(2) Requiring unnecessary experience and excessive bonding;

(3) Noncompetitive pricing practices between firms or between affiliated companies;

(4) Noncompetitive contracts to consultants that are on retainer contracts;

(5) Organizational conflicts of interest;

(6) Specifying only a “brand name” product instead of allowing “an equal” product to be offered and describing the performance or other relevant requirements of the procurement; and

(7) Any arbitrary action in the procurement process.

(d) The recipient or subrecipient must have written procedures for procurement transactions. These procedures must ensure that all solicitations:

(1) Are made in accordance with § 200.319(b);

(2) Incorporate a clear and accurate description of the technical requirements for the property, equipment, or service being procured. The description may include a statement of the qualitative nature of the property, equipment, or service to be procured. When necessary, the description must provide minimum essential characteristics and standards to which the property, equipment, or service must conform. Detailed product specifications should be avoided if at all possible. When it is impractical or uneconomical to clearly and accurately describe the technical requirements, a “brand name or equivalent” description of features may be used to provide procurement requirements. The specific features of the named brand must be clearly stated; and

(3) Identify any additional requirements which the offerors must fulfill and all other factors that will be used in evaluating bids or proposals.

(e) The recipient or subrecipient must ensure that all prequalified lists of persons, firms, or products used in procurement transactions are current and include enough qualified sources to ensure maximum open competition. When establishing or amending prequalified lists, the recipient or subrecipient must consider objective factors that evaluate price and cost to maximize competition. The recipient or subrecipient must not preclude potential bidders from qualifying during the solicitation period.

(f) To the extent consistent with established practices and legal requirements applicable to the recipient or subrecipient, this subpart does not prohibit recipients or subrecipients from developing written procedures for procurement transactions that incorporate a scoring mechanism that rewards bidders that commit to specific numbers and types of U.S. jobs, minimum compensation, benefits, on-the-job-training for employees making work products or providing services on a contract, and other worker protections. This subpart also does not prohibit recipients and subrecipients from making inquiries of bidders about these subjects and assessing the responses. Any scoring mechanism must be consistent with the U.S. Constitution, applicable Federal statutes and regulations, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award.

(g) Noncompetitive procurements can only be awarded in accordance with § 200.320(c).

§ 200.320 Procurement methods.

There are three types of procurement methods described in this section: informal procurement methods (for micro-purchases and simplified acquisitions); formal procurement methods (through sealed bids or proposals); and noncompetitive procurement methods. For any of these methods, the recipient or subrecipient must maintain and use documented procurement procedures, consistent with the standards of this section and §§ 200.317, 200.318, and 200.319.

(a) Informal procurement methods for small purchases.  These procurement methods expedite the completion of transactions, minimize administrative burdens, and reduce costs. Informal procurement methods may be used when the value of the procurement transaction under the Federal award does not exceed the simplified acquisition threshold as defined in § 200.1. Recipients and subrecipients may also establish a lower threshold. Informal procurement methods include:

(1) Micro-purchases —(i) Distribution.  The aggregate amount of the procurement transaction does not exceed the micro-purchase threshold defined in § 200.1. To the extent practicable, the recipient or subrecipient should distribute micro-purchases equitably among qualified suppliers.

(ii) Micro-purchase awards.  Micro-purchases may be awarded without soliciting competitive price or rate quotations if the recipient or subrecipient considers the price reasonable based on research, experience, purchase history, or other information; and maintains documents to support its conclusion. Purchase cards may be used as a method of payment for micro-purchases.

(iii) Micro-purchase thresholds.  The recipient or subrecipient is responsible for determining and documenting an appropriate micro-purchase threshold based on internal controls, an evaluation of risk, and its documented procurement procedures. The micro-purchase threshold used by the recipient or subrecipient must be authorized or not prohibited under State, local, or tribal laws or regulations. The recipient or subrecipient may establish a threshold higher than the Federal threshold established in the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR) in accordance with paragraphs (a)(1)(iv) and (v) of this section.

(iv) Recipient or subrecipient increase to the micro-purchase threshold up to $50,000.  The recipient or subrecipient may establish a threshold higher than the micro-purchase threshold identified in the FAR in accordance with the requirements of this section. The recipient or subrecipient may self-certify a threshold up to $50,000 on an annual basis and must maintain documentation to be made available to the Federal agency or pass-through entity and auditors in accordance with § 200.334. The self-certification must include a justification, clear identification of the threshold, and supporting documentation of any of the following:

(A) A qualification as a low-risk auditee, in accordance with the criteria in § 200.520 for the most recent audit;

(B) An annual internal institutional risk assessment to identify, mitigate, and manage financial risks; or,

(C) For public institutions, a higher threshold is consistent with State law.

(v) Recipient or subrecipient increase to the micro-purchase threshold over $50,000.  Micro-purchase thresholds higher than $50,000 must be approved by the cognizant agency for indirect costs. The recipient or subrecipient must submit a request that includes the requirements in paragraph (a)(1)(iv) of this section. The increased threshold is valid until any factor that was relied on in the establishment and rationale of the threshold changes.

(2) Simplified acquisitions —(i) Simplified acquisition procedures.  The aggregate dollar amount of the procurement transaction is higher than the micro-purchase threshold but does not exceed the simplified acquisition threshold. If simplified acquisition procedures are used, price or rate quotations must be obtained from an adequate number of qualified sources. Unless specified by the Federal agency, the recipient or subrecipient may exercise judgment in determining what number is adequate.

(ii) Simplified acquisition thresholds.  The recipient or subrecipient is responsible for determining an appropriate simplified acquisition threshold based on internal controls, an evaluation of risk, and its documented procurement procedures, which may be lower than, but must not exceed, the threshold established in the FAR.

(b) Formal procurement methods.  Formal procurement methods are required when the value of the procurement transaction under a Federal award exceeds the simplified acquisition threshold of the recipient or subrecipient. Formal procurement methods are competitive and require public notice. The following formal methods of procurement are used for procurement transactions above the simplified acquisition threshold determined by the recipient or subrecipient in accordance with paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section:

(1) Sealed bids.  This is a procurement method in which bids are publicly solicited through an invitation and a firm fixed-price contract (lump sum or unit price) is awarded to the responsible bidder whose bid conforms with all the material terms and conditions of the invitation and is the lowest in price. The sealed bids procurement method is preferred for procuring construction services.

(i) For sealed bidding to be feasible, the following conditions should be present:

(A) A complete, adequate, and realistic specification or purchase description is available; (B) Two or more responsible bidders have been identified as willing and able to compete effectively for the business; and

(C) The procurement lends itself to a firm-fixed-price contract, and the selection of the successful bidder can be made principally based on price.

(ii) If sealed bids are used, the following requirements apply:

(A) Bids must be solicited from an adequate number of qualified sources, providing them with sufficient response time prior to the date set for opening the bids. Unless specified by the Federal agency, the recipient or subrecipient may exercise judgment in determining what number is adequate. For local governments, the invitation for bids must be publicly advertised.

(B) The invitation for bids must define the items or services with specific information, including any required specifications, for the bidder to properly respond;

(C) All bids will be opened at the time and place prescribed in the invitation for bids. For local governments, the bids must be opened publicly.

(D) A firm-fixed-price contract is awarded in writing to the lowest responsive bid and responsible bidder. When specified in the invitation for bids, factors such as discounts, transportation cost, and life-cycle costs must be considered in determining which bid is the lowest. Payment discounts must only be used to determine the low bid when the recipient or subrecipient determines they are a valid factor based on prior experience.

(E) The recipient or subrecipient must document and provide a justification for all bids it rejects.

(2) Proposals.  This is a procurement method used when conditions are not appropriate for using sealed bids. This procurement method may result in either a fixed-price or cost-reimbursement contract. They are awarded in accordance with the following requirements:

(i) Requests for proposals require public notice, and all evaluation factors and their relative importance must be identified. Proposals must be solicited from multiple qualified entities. To the maximum extent practicable, any proposals submitted in response to the public notice must be considered.

(ii) The recipient or subrecipient must have written procedures for conducting technical evaluations and making selections.

(iii) Contracts must be awarded to the responsible offeror whose proposal is most advantageous to the recipient or subrecipient considering price and other factors; and

(iv) The recipient or subrecipient may use competitive proposal procedures for qualifications-based procurement of architectural/engineering (A/E) professional services whereby the offeror's qualifications are evaluated, and the most qualified offeror is selected, subject to negotiation of fair and reasonable compensation. The method, where the price is not used as a selection factor, can only be used to procure architectural/engineering (A/E) professional services. The method may not be used to purchase other services provided by A/E firms that are a potential source to perform the proposed effort.

(c) Noncompetitive procurement.  There are specific circumstances in which the recipient or subrecipient may use a noncompetitive procurement method. The noncompetitive procurement method may only be used if one of the following circumstances applies:

(1) The aggregate amount of the procurement transaction does not exceed the micro-purchase threshold (see paragraph (a)(1) of this section);

(2) The procurement transaction can only be fulfilled by a single source;

(3) The public exigency or emergency for the requirement will not permit a delay resulting from providing public notice of a competitive solicitation;

(4) The recipient or subrecipient requests in writing to use a noncompetitive procurement method, and the Federal agency or pass-through entity provides written approval; or

(5) After soliciting several sources, competition is determined inadequate.

§ 200.321 Contracting with small businesses, minority businesses, women's business enterprises, veteran-owned businesses, and labor surplus area firms.

(a) When possible, the recipient or subrecipient should ensure that small businesses, minority businesses, women's business enterprises, veteran-owned businesses, and labor surplus area firms (See U.S. Department of Labor's list) are considered as set forth below.

(b) Such consideration means:

(1) These business types are included on solicitation lists;

(2) These business types are solicited whenever they are deemed eligible as potential sources;

(3) Dividing procurement transactions into separate procurements to permit maximum participation by these business types;

(4) Establishing delivery schedules (for example, the percentage of an order to be delivered by a given date of each month) that encourage participation by these business types;

(5) Utilizing organizations such as the Small Business Administration and the Minority Business Development Agency of the Department of Commerce; and

(6) Requiring a contractor under a Federal award to apply this section to subcontracts.

§ 200.322 Domestic preferences for procurements.

(a) The recipient or subrecipient should, to the greatest extent practicable and consistent with law, provide a preference for the purchase, acquisition, or use of goods, products, or materials produced in the United States (including but not limited to iron, aluminum, steel, cement, and other manufactured products). The requirements of this section must be included in all subawards, contracts, and purchase orders under Federal awards.

(b) For purposes of this section:

(1) “Produced in the United States” means, for iron and steel products, that all manufacturing processes, from the initial melting stage through the application of coatings, occurred in the United States.

(2) “Manufactured products” means items and construction materials composed in whole or in part of non-ferrous metals such as aluminum; plastics and polymer-based products such as polyvinyl chloride pipe; aggregates such as concrete; glass, including optical fiber; and lumber.

(c) Federal agencies providing Federal financial assistance for infrastructure projects must implement the Buy America preferences set forth in 2 CFR part 184.

§ 200.323 Procurement of recovered materials.

(a) A recipient or subrecipient that is a State agency or agency of a political subdivision of a State and its contractors must comply with section 6002 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 as amended, 42 U.S.C. 6962. The requirements of Section 6002 include procuring only items designated in the guidelines of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR part 247 that contain the highest percentage of recovered materials practicable, consistent with maintaining a satisfactory level of competition, where the purchase price of the item exceeds $10,000 or the value of the quantity acquired during the preceding fiscal year exceeded $10,000; procuring solid waste management services in a manner that maximizes energy and resource recovery; and establishing an affirmative procurement program for procurement of recovered materials identified in the EPA guidelines.

(b) The recipient or subrecipient should, to the greatest extent practicable and consistent with law, purchase, acquire, or use products and services that can be reused, refurbished, or recycled; contain recycled content, are biobased, or are energy and water efficient; and are sustainable. This may include purchasing compostable items and other products and services that reduce the use of single-use plastic products. See Executive Order 14057, section 101, Policy.

§ 200.324 Contract cost and price.

(a) The recipient or subrecipient must perform a cost or price analysis for every procurement transaction, including contract modifications, in excess of the simplified acquisition threshold. The method and degree of analysis conducted depend on the facts surrounding the particular procurement transaction. For example, the recipient or subrecipient should consider potential workforce impacts in their analysis if the procurement transaction will displace public sector employees. However, as a starting point, the recipient or subrecipient must make independent estimates before receiving bids or proposals.

(b) Costs or prices based on estimated costs for contracts under the Federal award are allowable only to the extent that the costs incurred or cost estimates included in negotiated prices would be allowable for the recipient or subrecipient under subpart E of this part. The recipient or subrecipient may reference its own cost principles as long as they comply with subpart E of this part.

(c) The recipient or subrecipient must not use the “cost plus a percentage of cost” and “percentage of construction costs” methods of contracting.

§ 200.325 Federal agency or pass-through entity review.

(a) The Federal agency or pass-through entity may review the technical specifications of proposed procurements under the Federal award if the Federal agency or pass-through entity believes the review is needed to ensure that the item or service specified is the one being proposed for acquisition. The recipient or subrecipient must submit the technical specifications of proposed procurements when requested by the Federal agency or pass-through entity. This review should take place prior to the time the specifications are incorporated into a solicitation document. When the recipient or subrecipient desires to accomplish the review after a solicitation has been developed, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may still review the specifications. In those cases, the review should be limited to the technical aspects of the proposed purchase.

(b) When requested, the recipient or subrecipient must provide procurement documents (such as requests for proposals, invitations for bids, or independent cost estimates) to the Federal agency or pass-through entity for pre-procurement review. The Federal agency or pass-through entity may conduct a pre-procurement review when:

(1) The recipient's or subrecipient's procurement procedures or operation fails to comply with the procurement standards in this part;

(2) The procurement is expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold and is to be awarded without competition, or only one bid is expected to be received in response to a solicitation;

(3) The procurement is expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold and specifies a “brand name” product;

(4) The procurement is expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold, and a sealed bid procurement is to be awarded to an entity other than the apparent low bidder; or

(5) A proposed contract modification changes the scope of a contract or increases the contract amount by more than the simplified acquisition threshold.

(c) The recipient or subrecipient is exempt from the pre-procurement review in paragraph (b) of this section if the Federal agency or pass-through entity determines that its procurement systems comply with the standards of this part.

(1) The recipient or subrecipient may request that the Federal agency or pass-through entity review its procurement system to determine whether it meets these standards for its system to be certified. Generally, these reviews must occur where there is continuous high-dollar funding and third-party contracts are awarded regularly.

(2) The recipient or subrecipient may self-certify its procurement system. However, self-certification does not limit the Federal agency's or pass-through entity's right to review the system. Under a self-certification procedure, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may rely on written assurances from the recipient or subrecipient that it is complying with the standards of this part. The recipient or subrecipient must cite specific policies, procedures, regulations, or standards as complying with these requirements and have its system available for review.

§ 200.326 Bonding requirements.

The Federal agency or pass-through entity may accept the recipient's or subrecipient's bonding policy and requirements for construction or facility improvement contracts or subcontracts exceeding the simplified acquisition threshold. Before doing so, the Federal agency or pass-through entity must determine that the Federal interest is adequately protected. If such a determination has not been made, the minimum requirements must be as follows:

(a) A bid guarantee from each bidder equivalent to five percent of the bid price. The bid guarantee must consist of a firm commitment such as a bid bond, certified check, or other negotiable instrument accompanying a bid as assurance that the bidder will, upon acceptance of the bid, execute any required contractual documents within the specified timeframe.

(b) A performance bond on the contractor's part for 100 percent of the contract price. A performance bond is a bond executed in connection with a contract to secure the fulfillment of all the contractor's requirements under a contract.

(c) A payment bond on the contractor's part for 100 percent of the contract price. A payment bond is a bond executed in connection with a contract to assure payment as required by the law of all persons supplying labor and material in the execution of the work provided for under a contract.

§ 200.327 Contract provisions.

The recipient's or subrecipient's contracts must contain the applicable provisions described in Appendix II of this part.

Performance and Financial Monitoring and Reporting

§ 200.328 Financial reporting.

(a) The Federal agency must require only OMB-approved government-wide data elements on recipient financial reports. At the time of publication, this consists of the Federal Financial Report (SF-425); however, this also applies to any future OMB-approved government-wide data elements available from the OMB-designated standards lead.

(b) The Federal agency or pass-through entity must collect financial reports no less than annually. The Federal agency or pass-through entity may not collect financial reports more frequently than quarterly unless a specific condition has been implemented in accordance with § 200.208. To the extent practicable, the Federal agency or pass-through entity should collect financial reports in coordination with performance reports.

(c) The recipient or subrecipient must submit financial reports as required by the Federal award. Reports submitted annually by the recipient or subrecipient must be due no later than 90 calendar days after the reporting period. Reports submitted quarterly or semiannually must be due no later than 30 calendar days after the reporting period.

(d) The final financial report submitted by the recipient must be due no later than 120 calendar days after the conclusion of the period of performance. A subrecipient must submit a final financial report to a pass-through entity no later than 90 calendar days after the conclusion of the period of performance. See also § 200.344. The Federal agency or pass-through entity may extend the due date for any financial report with justification from the recipient or subrecipient.

§ 200.329 Monitoring and reporting program performance.

(a) Monitoring by the recipient and subrecipient.  The recipient and subrecipient are responsible for the oversight of the Federal award. The recipient and subrecipient must monitor their activities under Federal awards to ensure they are compliant with all requirements and meeting performance expectations. Monitoring by the recipient and subrecipient must cover each program, function, or activity. See also § 200.332.

(b) Reporting program performance.  The Federal agency must use OMB-approved common information collections (for example, Research Performance Progress Reports) when requesting performance reporting information. The Federal agency or pass-through entity may not collect performance reports more frequently than quarterly unless a specific condition has been implemented in accordance with § 200.208. To the extent practicable, the Federal agency or pass-through entity should align the due dates of performance reports and financial reports. When reporting program performance, the recipient or subrecipient must relate financial data and project or program accomplishments to the performance goals and objectives of the Federal award. Also, the recipient or subrecipient must provide cost information to demonstrate cost-effective practices (for example, through unit cost data) when required by the terms and conditions of the Federal award. In some instances (for example, discretionary research awards), this may be limited to the requirement to submit technical performance reports. Reporting requirements must clearly indicate a standard against which the recipient's or subrecipient's performance can be measured. Reporting requirements should not solicit information from the recipient or subrecipient that is not necessary for the effective monitoring or evaluation of the Federal award. Federal agencies should consult monitoring framework documents such as the agency's Evaluation Plan to make that determination. As noted in OMB Circular A-11, Part 6, Section 280, measures of customer experience are of co-equal importance as traditional measures of financial and operational performance.

(c) Submitting performance reports. (1) The recipient or subrecipient must submit performance reports as required by the Federal award. Intervals must be no less frequent than annually nor more frequent than quarterly except if specific conditions are applied (See § 200.208). Reports submitted annually by the recipient or subrecipient must be due no later than 90 calendar days after the reporting period. Reports submitted quarterly or semiannually must be due no later than 30 calendar days after the reporting period. Alternatively, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may require annual reports before the anniversary dates of multiple-year Federal awards. The final performance report submitted by the recipient must be due no later than 120 calendar days after the period of performance. A subrecipient must submit a final performance report to a pass-through entity no later than 90 calendar days after the conclusion of the period of performance. See also § 200.344. The Federal agency or pass-through entity may extend the due date for any performance report with justification from the recipient or subrecipient.

(2) As applicable, performance reports should contain information on the following:

(i) A comparison of accomplishments to the objectives of the Federal award established for the reporting period (for example, comparing costs to units of accomplishment). Where performance trend data and analysis would be informative to the Federal agency program, the Federal agency should include this as a performance reporting requirement.

(ii) Explanations on why established goals or objectives were not met; and

(iii) Additional information, analysis, and explanation of cost overruns or higher-than-expected unit costs.

(d) Construction performance reports.  Federal agencies or pass-through entities rely on on-site technical inspections and certified percentage of completion data to monitor progress under Federal awards for construction. Therefore, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may require additional performance reports when necessary to ensure the goals and objectives of Federal awards are met.

(e) Significant developments.  When a significant development that could impact the Federal award occurs between performance reporting due dates, the recipient or subrecipient must notify the Federal agency or pass-through entity. Significant developments include events that enable meeting milestones and objectives sooner or at less cost than anticipated or that produce different beneficial results than originally planned. Significant developments also include problems, delays, or adverse conditions which will impact the recipient's or subrecipient's ability to meet milestones or the objectives of the Federal award. When significant developments occur that negatively impact the Federal Award, the recipient or subrecipient must include information on their plan for corrective action and any assistance needed to resolve the situation.

(f) Site visits.  The Federal agency or pass-through entity may conduct in-person or virtual site visits as warranted.

(g) Performance report requirement waiver.  The Federal agency may waive any performance report that is not necessary to ensure the goals and objectives of the Federal award are being achieved.

§ 200.330 Reporting on real property.

The Federal agency or pass-through entity must require the recipient or subrecipient to submit reports on the status of real property in which the Federal Government retains an interest. Such reports must be submitted at least annually. In instances where the Federal Government's interest in the real property extends for 15 years or more, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may require the recipient or subrecipient to report at various multi-year frequencies. Reports submitted at multi-year frequencies may not exceed a five-year reporting period. The Federal agency must only require OMB-approved government-wide data elements on recipient real property reports.

Subrecipient Monitoring and Management

§ 200.331 Subrecipient and contractor determinations.

An entity may concurrently receive Federal awards as a recipient, a subrecipient, and a contractor. The pass-through entity is responsible for making case-by-case determinations to determine whether the entity receiving Federal funds is a subrecipient or a contractor. The Federal agency may require the pass-through entity to comply with additional guidance to make these determinations, provided such guidance does not conflict with this section. The Federal agency does not have a direct legal relationship with subrecipients or contractors of any tier; however, the Federal agency is responsible for monitoring the pass-through entity's oversight of first-tier subrecipients. All of the characteristics listed below may not be present in all cases, and some characteristics from both categories may be present at the same time. No single factor or any combination of factors is necessarily determinative. The pass-through entity must use judgment in classifying each agreement as a subaward or a procurement contract. In making this determination, the substance of the relationship is more important than the form of the agreement.

(a) Subrecipients.  A subaward is for the purpose of carrying out a portion of the Federal award and creates a Federal financial assistance relationship with a subrecipient. See the definition of Subaward in § 200.1. Characteristics that support the classification of the entity as a subrecipient include, but are not limited to, when the entity:

(1) Determines who is eligible to receive what Federal assistance;

(2) Has its performance measured in relation to whether the objectives of a Federal program were met;

(3) Has responsibility for programmatic decision-making;

(4) Is responsible for adherence to applicable Federal program requirements specified in the Federal award; and

(5) Implements a program for a public purpose specified in authorizing statute, as opposed to providing goods or services for the benefit of the pass-through entity.

(b) Contractors.  A contract is for the purpose of obtaining goods and services for the recipient's or subrecipient's use and creates a procurement relationship with a contractor. See the definition of contract in § 200.1. Characteristics that support a procurement relationship between the recipient or subrecipient and a contractor include, but are not limited to, when the contractor:

(1) Provides the goods and services within normal business operations;

(2) Provides similar goods or services to many different purchasers;

(3) Normally operates in a competitive environment;

(4) Provides goods or services that are ancillary to the implementation of a Federal program; and

(5) Is not subject to compliance requirements of a Federal program as a result of the agreement. However, similar requirements may apply for other reasons.

§ 200.332 Requirements for pass-through entities.

A pass-through entity must:

(a) Verify that the subrecipient is not excluded or disqualified in accordance with § 180.300. Verification methods are provided in § 180.300, which include confirming in SAM.gov that a potential subrecipient is not suspended, debarred, or otherwise excluded from receiving Federal funds.

(b) Ensure that every subaward is clearly identified to the subrecipient as a subaward and includes the information provided below. A pass-through entity must provide the best available information when some of the information below is unavailable. A pass-through entity must provide the unavailable information when it is obtained. Required information includes:

(1) Federal award identification.

(i) Subrecipient's name (must match the name associated with its unique entity identifier);

(ii) Subrecipient's unique entity identifier;

(iii) Federal Award Identification Number (FAIN);

(iv) Federal Award Date;

(v) Subaward Period of Performance Start and End Date;

(vi) Subaward Budget Period Start and End Date;

(vii) Amount of Federal Funds Obligated in the subaward;

(viii) Total Amount of Federal Funds Obligated to the subrecipient by the pass-through entity, including the current financial obligation;

(ix) Total Amount of the Federal Award committed to the subrecipient by the pass-through entity;

(x) Federal award project description, as required by the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act (FFATA);

(xi) Name of the Federal agency, pass-through entity, and contact information for awarding official of the pass-through entity;

(xii) Assistance Listings title and number; the pass-through entity must identify the dollar amount made available under each Federal award and the Assistance Listings Number at the time of disbursement;

(xiii) Identification of whether the Federal award is for research and development; and

(xiv) Indirect cost rate for the Federal award (including if the de minimis rate is used in accordance with § 200.414).

(2) All requirements of the subaward, including requirements imposed by Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award;

(3) Any additional requirements that the pass-through entity imposes on the subrecipient for the pass-through entity to meet its responsibilities under the Federal award. This includes information and certifications (see § 200.415) required for submitting financial and performance reports that the pass-through entity must provide to the Federal agency;

(4) Indirect cost rate:

(i) An approved indirect cost rate negotiated between the subrecipient and the Federal Government. If no approved rate exists, a pass-through entity must determine the appropriate rate in collaboration with the subrecipient. The indirect cost rate may be either:

(A) An indirect cost rate negotiated between the pass-through entity and the subrecipient. These rates may be based on a prior negotiated rate between a different pass-through entity and the subrecipient, in which case the pass-through entity is not required to collect information justifying the rate but may elect to do so; or

(B) The de minimis indirect cost rate.

(ii) The pass-through entity must not require the use of the de minimis indirect cost rate if the subrecipient has an approved indirect cost rate negotiated with the Federal Government. Subrecipients may elect to use the cost allocation method to account for indirect costs in accordance with § 200.405(d).

(5) A requirement that the subrecipient permit the pass-through entity and auditors to access the subrecipient's records and financial statements for the pass-through entity to fulfill its monitoring requirements; and

(6) Appropriate terms and conditions concerning the closeout of the subaward.

(c) Evaluate each subrecipient's fraud risk and risk of noncompliance with a subaward to determine the appropriate subrecipient monitoring described in paragraph (f) of this section. When evaluating a subrecipient's risk, a pass-through entity should consider the following:

(1) The subrecipient's prior experience with the same or similar subawards;

(2) The results of previous audits. This includes considering whether or not the subrecipient receives a Single Audit in accordance with subpart F and the extent to which the same or similar subawards have been audited as a major program;

(3) Whether the subrecipient has new personnel or new or substantially changed systems; and

(4) The extent and results of any Federal agency monitoring (for example, if the subrecipient also receives Federal awards directly from the Federal agency).

(d) If appropriate, consider implementing specific conditions in a subaward as described in § 200.208 and notify the Federal agency of the specific conditions.

(e) Monitor the activities of a subrecipient as necessary to ensure that the subrecipient complies with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the subaward. The pass-through entity is responsible for monitoring the overall performance of a subrecipient to ensure that the goals and objectives of the subaward are achieved. In monitoring a subrecipient, a pass-through entity must:

(1) Review financial and performance reports.

(2) Ensure that the subrecipient takes corrective action on all significant developments that negatively affect the subaward. Significant developments include Single Audit findings related to the subaward, other audit findings, site visits, and written notifications from a subrecipient of adverse conditions which will impact their ability to meet the milestones or the objectives of a subaward. When significant developments negatively impact the subaward, a subrecipient must provide the pass-through entity with information on their plan for corrective action and any assistance needed to resolve the situation.

(3) Issue a management decision for audit findings pertaining only to the Federal award provided to the subrecipient from the pass-through entity as required by § 200.521.

(4) Resolve audit findings specifically related to the subaward. However, the pass-through entity is not responsible for resolving cross-cutting audit findings that apply to the subaward and other Federal awards or subawards. If a subrecipient has a current Single Audit report and has not been excluded from receiving Federal funding (meaning, has not been debarred or suspended), the pass-through entity may rely on the subrecipient's cognizant agency for audit or oversight agency for audit to perform audit follow-up and make management decisions related to cross-cutting audit findings in accordance with section § 200.513(a)(4)(viii). Such reliance does not eliminate the responsibility of the pass-through entity to issue subawards that conform to agency and award-specific requirements, to manage risk through ongoing subaward monitoring, and to monitor the status of the findings that are specifically related to the subaward.

(f) Depending upon the pass-through entity's assessment of the risk posed by the subrecipient (as described in paragraph (c) of this section), the following monitoring tools may be useful for the pass-through entity to ensure proper accountability and compliance with program requirements and achievement of performance goals:

(1) Providing subrecipients with training and technical assistance on program-related matters;

(2) Performing site visits to review the subrecipient's program operations; and

(3) Arranging for agreed-upon-procedures engagements as described in § 200.425.

(g) Verify that a subrecipient is audited as required by subpart F of this part.

(h) Consider whether the results of a subrecipient's audit, site visits, or other monitoring necessitate adjustments to the pass-through entity's records.

(i) Consider taking enforcement action against noncompliant subrecipients as described in § 200.339 and in program regulations.

§ 200.333 Fixed amount subawards.

With prior written approval from the Federal agency, the recipient may provide subawards based on fixed amounts up to $500,000. Fixed amount subawards must meet the requirements of § 200.201.

Record Retention and Access

§ 200.334 Record retention requirements.

The recipient and subrecipient must retain all Federal award records for three years from the date of submission of their final financial report. For awards that are renewed quarterly or annually, the recipient and subrecipient must retain records for three years from the date of submission of their quarterly or annual financial report, respectively. Records to be retained include but are not limited to, financial records, supporting documentation, and statistical records. Federal agencies or pass-through entities may not impose any other record retention requirements except for the following:

(a) The records must be retained until all litigation, claims, or audit findings involving the records have been resolved and final action taken if any litigation, claim, or audit is started before the expiration of the three-year period.

(b) When the recipient or subrecipient is notified in writing by the Federal agency or pass-through entity, cognizant agency for audit, oversight agency for audit, or cognizant agency for indirect costs to extend the retention period.

(c) The records for property and equipment acquired with the support of Federal funds must be retained for three years after final disposition.

(d) The three-year retention requirement does not apply to the recipient or subrecipient when records are transferred to or maintained by the Federal agency.

(e) The records for program income earned after the period of performance must be retained for three years from the end of the recipient's or subrecipient's fiscal year in which the program income is earned. This only applies if the Federal agency or pass-through entity requires the recipient or subrecipient to report on program income earned after the period of performance in the terms and conditions of the Federal award.

(f) The records for indirect cost rate computations or proposals, cost allocation plans, and any similar accounting computations of the rate at which a particular group of costs is chargeable (such as computer usage chargeback rates or composite fringe benefit rates) must be retained according to the applicable option below:

(1) If submitted for negotiation.  When a proposal, plan, or other computation must be submitted to the Federal Government to form the basis for negotiation of an indirect cost rate (or other standard rates), then the three-year retention period for its supporting records starts from the date of submission.

(2) If not submitted for negotiation.  When a proposal, plan, or other computation is not required to be submitted to the Federal Government to form the basis for negotiation of an indirect cost rate (or other standard rates), then the three-year retention period for its supporting records starts from the end of the fiscal year (or other accounting period) covered by the proposal, plan, or other computation.

§ 200.335 Requests for transfer of records.

The Federal agency must request the transfer of records to its custody from the recipient or subrecipient when it determines that the records possess long-term retention value. However, the Federal agency may arrange for the recipient or subrecipient to retain the records that have long-term retention value so long as they are continuously available to the Federal Government.

§ 200.336 Methods for collection, transmission, and storage of information.

When practicable, the Federal agency or pass-through entity and the recipient or subrecipient must collect, transmit, and store Federal award information in open and machine-readable formats. A machine-readable format is a format in a standard computer language (not English text) that can be read automatically by a computer system. Upon request, the Federal agency or pass-through entity must always provide or accept paper versions of Federal award information to and from the recipient or subrecipient. The Federal agency or pass-through entity must not require additional copies of Federal award information submitted in paper versions. The recipient or subrecipient does not need to create and retain paper copies when original records are electronic and cannot be altered. In addition, the recipient or subrecipient may substitute electronic versions of original paper records through duplication or other forms of electronic conversion, provided that the procedures are subject to periodic quality control reviews. Quality control reviews must ensure that electronic conversion procedures provide safeguards against the alteration of records and assurance that records remain in a format that is readable by a computer system.

§ 200.337 Access to records.

(a) Records of recipients and subrecipients.  The Federal agency or pass-through entity, Inspectors General, the Comptroller General of the United States, or any of their authorized representatives must have the right of access to any records of the recipient or subrecipient pertinent to the Federal award to perform audits, execute site visits, or for any other official use. This right also includes timely and reasonable access to the recipient's or subrecipient's personnel for the purpose of interview and discussion related to such documents or the Federal award in general.

(b) Extraordinary and rare circumstances.  The recipient or subrecipient and Federal agency or pass-through entity must take measures to protect the name of victims of a crime when access to the victim's name is necessary. Only under extraordinary and rare circumstances would such access include a review of the true name of victims of a crime. Routine monitoring cannot be considered extraordinary and rare circumstances that would necessitate access to this information. Any such access, other than under a court order or subpoena pursuant to a bona fide confidential investigation, must be approved by the head or delegate of the Federal agency.

(c) Expiration of right of access.  The Federal agency's or pass-through entity's rights of access are not limited to the required retention period of this part but last as long as the records are retained. Federal agencies or pass-through entities must not impose any other access requirements upon recipients and subrecipients.

§ 200.338 Restrictions on public access to records.

Federal agencies may not place restrictions on the recipient or subrecipient that limit public access to the records of the recipient or subrecipient pertinent to a Federal award, except for protected personally identifiable information (PII) or other sensitive information when the Federal agency can demonstrate that such records will be kept confidential and would have been exempted from disclosure pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) or controlled unclassified information pursuant to Executive Order 13556 if the records had belonged to the Federal agency. The Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) (FOIA) does not apply to records that remain under the recipient's or subrecipient's control except as required by § 200.315. Unless required by Federal, State, local, or tribal law, recipients and subrecipients are not required to permit public access to their records. The recipient's or subrecipient's records provided to a Federal agency generally will be subject to FOIA and applicable exemptions.

Remedies for Noncompliance

§ 200.339 Remedies for noncompliance.

The Federal agency or pass-through entity may implement specific conditions if the recipient or subrecipient fails to comply with the U.S. Constitution, Federal statutes, regulations, or terms and conditions of the Federal award. See § 200.208 for additional information on specific conditions. When the Federal agency or pass-through entity determines that noncompliance cannot be remedied by imposing specific conditions, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may take one or more of the following actions:

(a) Temporarily withhold payments until the recipient or subrecipient takes corrective action.

(b) Disallow costs for all or part of the activity associated with the noncompliance of the recipient or subrecipient.

(c) Suspend or terminate the Federal award in part or in its entirety.

(d) Initiate suspension or debarment proceedings as authorized in 2 CFR part 180 and the Federal agency's regulations, or for pass-through entities, recommend suspension or debarment proceedings be initiated by the Federal agency.

(e) Withhold further Federal funds (new awards or continuation funding) for the project or program.

(f) Pursue other legally available remedies.

§ 200.340 Termination.

(a) The Federal award may be terminated in part or its entirety as follows:

(1) By the Federal agency or pass-through entity if the recipient or subrecipient fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the Federal award;

(2) By the Federal agency or pass-through entity with the consent of the recipient or subrecipient, in which case the two parties must agree upon the termination conditions. These conditions include the effective date and, in the case of partial termination, the portion to be terminated;

(3) By the recipient or subrecipient upon sending the Federal agency or pass-through entity a written notification of the reasons for such termination, the effective date, and, in the case of partial termination, the portion to be terminated. However, if the Federal agency or pass-through entity determines that the remaining portion of the Federal award will not accomplish the purposes for which the Federal award was made, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may terminate the Federal award in its entirety; or

(4) By the Federal agency or pass-through entity pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Federal award, including, to the extent authorized by law, if an award no longer effectuates the program goals or agency priorities.

(b) The Federal agency or pass-through entity must clearly and unambiguously specify all termination provisions in the terms and conditions of the Federal award.

(c) When the Federal agency terminates the Federal award prior to the end of the period of performance due to the recipient's material failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the Federal award, the Federal agency must report the termination in SAM.gov. A Federal agency must use the Contractor Performance Assessment Reporting System (CPARS) to enter information in SAM.gov.

(1) The information required under paragraph (c) of this section is not to be reported in SAM.gov until the recipient has either:

(i) Exhausted its opportunities to object or challenge the decision (see § 200.342); or

(ii) Has not, within 30 calendar days after being notified of the termination, informed the Federal agency that it intends to appeal the decision to terminate.

(2) If a Federal agency, after entering information about a termination in SAM.gov, subsequently:

(i) Learns that any of that information is erroneous, the Federal agency must correct the information in the system within three business days;

(ii) Obtains an update to that information that could be helpful to other Federal agencies, the Federal agency is strongly encouraged to amend the information in the system to incorporate the update in a timely way.

(3) The Federal agency must not post any information that will be made publicly available in the non-public segment of SAM.gov that is covered by a disclosure exemption under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). When the recipient asserts within seven calendar days to the Federal agency which posted the information that a disclosure exemption under FOIA covers some of the information made publicly available, the Federal agency that posted the information must remove the posting within seven calendar days of receiving the assertion. Before reposting the releasable information, the Federal agency must resolve the issue in accordance with the agency's FOIA procedures.

(d) When the Federal award is terminated in part or its entirety, the Federal agency or pass-through entity and recipient or subrecipient remain responsible for compliance with the requirements in §§ 200.344 and 200.345.

§ 200.341 Notification of termination requirement.

(a) The Federal agency or pass-through entity must provide written notice of termination to the recipient or subrecipient. The written notice of termination should include the reasons for termination, the effective date, and the portion of the Federal award to be terminated, if applicable.

(b) If the Federal award is terminated for the recipient's material failure to comply with a Federal award, the notification must state the following:

(1) The termination decision will be reported in SAM.gov;

(2) The information will be available in SAM.gov for five years from the date of the termination and then archived;

(3) Federal agencies that consider making a Federal award to the recipient during the five year period must consider this information in judging whether the recipient is qualified to receive the Federal award when the Federal share of the Federal award is expected to exceed the simplified acquisition threshold over the period of performance;

(4) The recipient may comment on any information in SAM.gov about the recipient for future consideration by Federal agencies. The recipient may submit comments in SAM.gov.

(5) Federal agencies should consider the recipient's comments when determining whether the recipient is qualified for a Federal award.

(c) Upon termination of the Federal award, the Federal agency must provide the information required by the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act (FFATA) to USAspending.gov. In addition, the Federal agency must update or notify any other relevant government-wide systems or entities of any indications of poor performance as required by 41 U.S.C. 2313 and 31 U.S.C. 3321.

§ 200.342 Opportunities to object, hearings, and appeals.

The Federal agency must maintain written procedures for processing objections, hearings, and appeals. Upon initiating a remedy for noncompliance (for example, disallowed costs, a corrective action plan, or termination), the Federal agency must provide the recipient with an opportunity to object and provide information challenging the action. The Federal agency or pass-through entity must comply with any requirements for hearings, appeals, or other administrative proceedings to which the recipient or subrecipient is entitled under any statute or regulation applicable to the action involved.

§ 200.343 Effects of suspension and termination.

Costs to the recipient or subrecipient resulting from financial obligations incurred by the recipient or subrecipient during a suspension or after the termination of a Federal award are not allowable unless the Federal agency or pass-through entity expressly authorizes them in the notice of suspension or termination or subsequently. However, costs during suspension or after termination are allowable if:

(a) The costs result from financial obligations which were properly incurred by the recipient or subrecipient before the effective date of suspension or termination, and not in anticipation of it; and

(b) The costs would be allowable if the Federal award was not suspended or expired normally at the end of the period of performance in which the termination takes effect.

Closeout

§ 200.344 Closeout.

(a) The Federal agency or pass-through entity must close out the Federal award when it determines that all administrative actions and required work of the Federal award have been completed. When the recipient or subrecipient fails to complete the necessary administrative actions or the required work for an award, the Federal agency or pass-through entity must proceed with closeout based on the information available. This section specifies the administrative actions required at the end of the period of performance.

(b) A recipient must submit all reports (financial, performance, and other reports required by the Federal award) no later than 120 calendar days after the conclusion of the period of performance. A subrecipient must submit all reports (financial, performance, and other reports required by a subaward) to the pass-through entity no later than 90 calendar days after the conclusion of the period of performance of the subaward (or an earlier date as agreed upon by the pass-through entity and subrecipient). When justified, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may approve extensions for the recipient or subrecipient. When the recipient does not have a final indirect cost rate covering the period of performance, a final financial report must still be submitted to fulfill the requirements of this section. The recipient must submit a revised final financial report when all applicable indirect cost rates have been finalized.

(c) The recipient must liquidate all financial obligations incurred under the Federal award no later than 120 calendar days after the conclusion of the period of performance. A subrecipient must liquidate all financial obligations incurred under a subaward no later than 90 calendar days after the conclusion of the period of performance of the subaward (or an earlier date as agreed upon by the pass-through entity and subrecipient). When justified, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may approve extensions for the recipient or subrecipient.

(d) The Federal agency or pass-through entity must not delay payments to the recipient or subrecipient for costs meeting the requirements of subpart E of this part.

(e) The recipient or subrecipient must promptly refund any unobligated funds that the Federal agency or pass-through entity paid and that are not authorized to be retained. See OMB Circular A-129 and § 200.346.

(f) The Federal agency or pass-through entity must make all necessary adjustments to the Federal share of costs after closeout reports are received (for example, to reflect the disallowance of any costs or the deobligation of an unliquidated balance).

(g) The recipient or subrecipient must account for any property acquired with Federal funds or received from the Federal Government in accordance with §§ 200.310 through 200.316 and 200.330.

(h) The Federal agency must make every effort to complete all closeout actions no later than one year after the end of the period of performance. If the indirect cost rate has not been finalized and would delay closeout, the Federal agency is authorized to mutually agree with the recipient to close an award using the current or most recently negotiated rate. However, the recipient is not required to agree to a final rate for a Federal award for the purpose of prompt closeout.

(i) If the recipient does not comply with the requirements of this section, including submitting all final reports, the Federal agency must report the recipient's material failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the Federal award in SAM.gov. A Federal agency must use the Contractor Performance Assessment Reporting System (CPARS) to enter or amend information in SAM.gov. Federal agencies may also pursue other enforcement actions as appropriate. See § 200.339.

Post-Closeout Adjustments and Continuing Responsibilities

§ 200.345 Post-closeout adjustments and continuing responsibilities.

(a) The closeout of the Federal award does not affect any of the following:

(1) The right of the Federal agency or pass-through entity to disallow costs and recover funds on the basis of a later audit or review. However, the Federal agency or pass-through entity must make determinations to disallow costs and notify the recipient or subrecipient within the record retention period.

(2) The recipient's or subrecipient's requirement to return funds or right to receive any remaining and available funds as a result of refunds, corrections, final indirect cost rate adjustments (unless the Federal award in closed in accordance with § 200.344(h)), or other transactions.

(3) The ability of the Federal agency or pass-through entity to make financial adjustments to a previously closed Federal award, such as resolving indirect cost payments and making final payments.

(4) Audit requirements in subpart F of this part.

(5) Property management and disposition requirements in §§ 200.310 through 200.316.

(6) Records retention as required in §§ 200.334 through 200.337.

(b) After the closeout of the Federal award, a relationship created under the Federal award may be modified or ended in whole or in part. This may only be done with the consent of the awarding Federal agency or pass-through entity and the recipient or subrecipient, provided the responsibilities of the recipient or subrecipient referred to in paragraph (a) of this section, including those for property management as applicable, are considered and provisions are made for continuing responsibilities of the recipient or subrecipient, as appropriate.

Collection of Amounts Due

§ 200.346 Collection of amounts due.

Any Federal funds paid to the recipient or subrecipient in excess of the amount that the recipient or subrecipient is determined to be entitled to under the Federal award constitute a debt to the Federal Government. The Federal agency must collect all debts arising out of its Federal awards in accordance with the Standards for the Administrative Collection of Claims (31 CFR part 901).

Subpart E—Cost Principles

General Provisions

§ 200.400 Policy guide.

The application of these cost principles is based on the fundamental premises that:

(a) The recipient and subrecipient are responsible for the efficient and effective administration of the Federal award through sound management practices.

(b) The recipient and subrecipient are responsible for administering Federal funds in a manner consistent with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the Federal award.

(c) The recipient and subrecipient, in recognition of their unique combination of staff, facilities, and experience, are responsible for employing organization and management techniques necessary to ensure the proper and efficient administration of the Federal award.

(d) The accounting practices of the recipient and subrecipient must be consistent with these cost principles and support the accumulation of costs as required by these cost principles, including maintaining adequate documentation to support costs charged to the Federal award.

(e) When reviewing, negotiating, and approving cost allocation plans or indirect cost proposals, the cognizant agency for indirect costs should ensure that the recipient consistently applies these cost principles. Where wide variations exist in the treatment of a given cost item by the recipient, the reasonableness and equity of such treatments should be fully considered. See the definition of indirect costs in § 200.1.

(f) For recipients and subrecipients that educate and engage students in research, the dual role of students as both trainees and employees (including pre- and post-doctoral staff) contributing to the completion of Federal awards for research must be recognized in the application of these principles.

(g) The recipient or subrecipient must not earn or keep any profit resulting from Federal financial assistance unless explicitly authorized by the terms and conditions of the Federal award. See also § 200.307. When the required activities of a fixed amount award were completed in accordance with the terms and conditions of the award, the unexpended funds retained by the recipient or subrecipient are not considered profit.

§ 200.401 Application.

(a) General.  The recipient and subrecipient must apply these principles in determining allowable costs under Federal awards. The recipient and subrecipient must also use these principles as a guide in pricing fixed-price contracts and subcontracts when costs are used in determining the appropriate price. These cost principles do not apply to:

(1) Arrangements under which Federal financing is in the form of loans, scholarships, fellowships, traineeships, or other fixed amounts based on items such as education allowance or published tuition rates and fees.

(2) Capitation awards based on case counts or the number of beneficiaries.

(3) Fixed amount awards, except as provided in § 200.101(b). See also § 200.201.

(4) Federal awards to hospitals (see Appendix IX of this part).

(5) Food commodities provided through grants and cooperative agreements.

(6) Other awards under which the recipient or subrecipient is not required to account for actual costs incurred.

(b) Federal contract.  A Federal contract awarded to a recipient is subject to the Cost Accounting Standards (CAS). It must incorporate the applicable CAS requirements per 48 CFR Chapter 99 and 48 CFR part 30 (FAR Part 30). With respect to the allocation of costs, the Cost Accounting Standards at 48 CFR parts 9904 or 9905 take precedence over the cost principles in subpart E. When a contract with a recipient is subject to full CAS coverage, the allowability of certain costs under the cost principles will be affected by the allocation provisions of the Cost Accounting Standards (for example, CAS 414—48 CFR 9904.414—Cost of Money as an Element of the Cost of Facilities Capital, and CAS 417—48 CFR 9904.417—Cost of Money as an Element of the Cost of Capital Assets Under Construction, apply instead of the allowability provisions of § 200.449). For example, the allowability of costs in CAS-covered contracts is determined first by the allocation provisions of the Cost Accounting Standards rather than the allowability provisions in § 200.449 (unless the CAS does not address the specific costs). In complying with those requirements, the recipient's application of cost accounting practices for estimating, accumulating, and reporting costs for Federal awards and CAS-covered contracts must be consistent with 48 CFR. The recipient only needs to maintain one set of accounting records supporting the allocation of costs if the recipient administers both Federal awards and CAS-covered contracts.

(c) Exemptions.  Some nonprofit organizations, because of their size and nature of operations, can be considered to be similar to for-profit organizations in terms of the applicability of cost principles. These nonprofit organizations must operate under Federal cost principles that apply to for-profit organizations located at 48 CFR 31.2. Appendix VIII contains a list of these nonprofit organizations. Other organizations may be added to this list if approved by the cognizant agency for indirect costs.

Basic Considerations

§ 200.402 Composition of costs.

The total cost of a Federal award is the sum of the allowable direct and allocable indirect costs minus any applicable credits

§ 200.403 Factors affecting allowability of costs.

Except where otherwise authorized by statute, costs must meet the following criteria to be allowable under Federal awards:

(a) Be necessary and reasonable for the performance of the Federal award and be allocable thereto under these principles.

(b) Conform to any limitations or exclusions set forth in these principles or in the Federal award as to types or amount of cost items.

(c) Be consistent with policies and procedures that apply uniformly to both federally financed and other activities of the recipient or subrecipient.

(d) Be accorded consistent treatment. For example, a cost must not be assigned to a Federal award as a direct cost if any other cost incurred for the same purpose in like circumstances has been allocated to the Federal award as an indirect cost.

(e) Be determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), except, for State and local governments and Indian Tribes only, as otherwise provided for in this part.

(f) Not be included as a cost or used to meet cost sharing requirements of any other federally-financed program in either the current or a prior period. See § 200.306(b).

(g) Be adequately documented. See §§ 200.300 through 200.309.

(h) Administrative closeout costs may be incurred until the due date of the final report(s). If incurred, these costs must be liquidated prior to the due date of the final report(s) and charged to the final budget period of the award unless otherwise specified by the Federal agency. All other costs must be incurred during the approved budget period. At its discretion, the Federal agency is authorized to waive prior written approvals to carry forward unobligated balances to subsequent budget periods. See § 200.308(g)(3).

§ 200.404 Reasonable costs.

A cost is reasonable if it does not exceed an amount that a prudent person would incur under the circumstances prevailing when the decision was made to incur the cost. In determining the reasonableness of a given cost, consideration must be given to the following:

(a) Whether the cost is generally recognized as ordinary and necessary for the recipient's or subrecipient's operation or the proper and efficient performance of the Federal award;

(b) The restraints or requirements imposed by such factors as sound business practices; arm's-length bargaining; Federal, State, local, tribal, and other laws and regulations; and terms and conditions of the Federal award;

(c) Market prices for comparable costs for the geographic area;

(d) Whether the individuals concerned acted with prudence in the circumstances considering their responsibilities to the recipient or subrecipient, its employees, its students or membership (if applicable), the public at large, and the Federal Government; and

(e) Whether the cost represents a deviation from the recipient's or subrecipient's established written policies and procedures for incurring costs.

§ 200.405 Allocable costs.

(a) Allocable costs in general.  A cost is allocable to a Federal award or other cost objective if the cost is assignable to that Federal award or other cost objective in accordance with the relative benefits received. This standard is met if the cost satisfies any of the following criteria:

(1) Is incurred specifically for the Federal award;

(2) Benefits both the Federal award and other work of the recipient or subrecipient and can be distributed in proportions that may be approximated using reasonable methods; or

(3) Is necessary to the overall operation of the recipient or subrecipient and is assignable in part to the Federal award in accordance with these cost principles.

(b) Allocation of indirect costs.  All activities which benefit from the recipient's or subrecipient's indirect cost, including unallowable activities and donated services by the recipient or subrecipient or third parties, will receive an appropriate allocation of indirect costs.

(c) Limitation on charging certain allocable costs to other Federal awards.  A cost allocable to a particular Federal award may not be charged to other Federal awards (for example, to overcome fund deficiencies or to avoid restrictions imposed by Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of the Federal awards). However, this prohibition would not preclude the recipient or subrecipient from shifting costs that are allowable under two or more Federal awards in accordance with existing Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of the Federal awards.

(d) Direct cost allocation principles.  If a cost benefits two or more projects or activities in proportions that can be determined without undue effort or cost, the cost must be allocated to the projects based on the proportional benefit However, when those proportions cannot be determined because of the interrelationship of the work involved, then, notwithstanding paragraph (c), the costs may be allocated or transferred to benefitted projects on any reasonable documented basis. Where the purchase of equipment or other capital asset is specifically authorized under a Federal award, the costs are assignable to the Federal award regardless of the use that may be made of the equipment or other capital asset involved, when no longer needed for the purpose for which it was originally required. See also §§ 200.310 through 200.316 and 200.439.

(e) Costs of contracts subject to CAS.  If a contract is subject to CAS, costs must be allocated to that contract according to the Cost Accounting Standards, which take precedence over the allocation provisions in this part.

§ 200.406 Applicable credits.

(a) Applicable credits refer to transactions that offset or reduce direct or indirect costs allocable to a Federal award. Examples of such transactions are purchase discounts, rebates or allowances, recoveries or indemnities on losses, insurance refunds or rebates, and adjustments of overpayments or erroneous charges. To the extent that such credits accruing to or received by the recipient or subrecipient relate to allowable costs, they must be credited to the Federal award either as a cost reduction or cash refund, as appropriate.

(b) In some instances, the amounts received from the Federal Government to finance activities or service operations of the recipient or subrecipient should be treated as applicable credits. Specifically, the concept of netting such credit items (including any amounts used to meet cost sharing requirements) must be recognized in determining the rates or amounts to be charged to the Federal award. See §§ 200.436 and 200.468 for potential application areas.

§ 200.407 Prior written approval (prior approval).

The reasonableness and allocability of certain costs under Federal awards may be difficult to determine. To avoid subsequent disallowance or dispute based on unreasonableness or nonallocability, the recipient may seek the prior written approval of the Federal agency (or, for indirect costs, the cognizant agency for indirect costs) before incurring the cost. The absence of prior written approval on any element of cost will not, in itself, affect the reasonableness or allocability of that cost unless prior approval is specifically required for allowability as described under certain circumstances in the following sections:

(a) Section 200.306 Cost sharing;

(b) Section 200.307 Program income;

(c) Section 200.308 Revision of budget and program plans;

(d) Section 200.333 Fixed amount subawards;

(e) Section 200.430 Compensation—personal services, paragraph (h);

(f) Section 200.431 Compensation—fringe benefits;

(g) Section 200.439 Equipment and other capital expenditures;

(h) Section 200.440 Exchange rates;

(i) Section 200.441 Fines, penalties, damages and other settlements;

(j) Section 200.442 Fund raising and investment management costs;

(k) Section 200.445 Goods or services for personal use;

(l) Section 200.447 Insurance and indemnification;

(m) Section 200.455 Organization costs;

(n) Section 200.458 Pre-award costs;

(o) Section 200.462 Rearrangement and reconversion costs;

(p) Section 200.475 Travel costs.

§ 200.408 Limitation on allowance of costs.

Statutory requirements may limit the allowability of costs. Any costs that exceed the maximum amount allowed by statute may not be charged to the Federal award. Only the amount allowable by statute may be charged to the Federal award.

§ 200.409 Special considerations.

Other sections in this part describe special considerations and requirements applicable to states, local governments, Indian Tribes, and IHEs. In addition, certain provisions among the items of cost in this subpart are only applicable to certain types of recipients and subrecipients, as specified in the following sections:

(a) Direct and Indirect Costs (§§ 200.412-200.415);

(b) Special Considerations for States, Local Governments and Indian Tribes (§§ 200.416 and 200.417); and

(c) Special Considerations for Institutions of Higher Education (§§ 200.418 and 200.419).

§ 200.410 Collection of unallowable costs.

Payments made for costs determined to be unallowable by either the awarding Federal agency, cognizant agency for indirect costs, or pass-through entity must be refunded with interest to the Federal Government. Unless directed by Federal statute or regulation, repayments must be made in accordance with the instructions provided by the Federal agency or pass-through entity that made the allowability determination. See §§ 200.300 through 200.309, and § 200.346.

§ 200.411 Adjustment of previously negotiated indirect cost rates containing unallowable costs.

(a) Negotiated indirect cost rates based on a proposal later found to have included costs that:

(1) Are unallowable as specified by Federal statutes, regulations or the terms and conditions of a Federal award; or

(2) Are unallowable because they are not allocable to the Federal award(s), must be adjusted, or a refund must be made in accordance with the requirements of this section. These adjustments or refunds are intended to correct the proposals used to establish the rates and do not constitute a reopening of the rate negotiation. The adjustments or refunds must be made regardless of the type of rate negotiated (predetermined, final, fixed, or provisional).

(b) For rates covering a future fiscal year of the recipient or subrecipient, the unallowable costs must be removed from the indirect cost pools and the rates must be adjusted.

(c) For rates covering a past period, the Federal share of the unallowable costs must be computed for each year involved, and a cash refund (including interest) must be made to the Federal Government in accordance with the directions provided by the cognizant agency for indirect costs. When cash refunds are made for past periods covered by provisional or fixed rates, appropriate adjustments must be made when the rates are finalized to avoid duplicate recovery of the unallowable costs.

(d) For rates covering the current period, either a rate adjustment or a refund, as described in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, must be required by the cognizant agency for indirect costs. The choice of method must be at the discretion of the cognizant agency for indirect costs, based on its judgment as to which method would be most practical.

(e) The amount or proportion of unallowable costs included in each year's rate will be assumed to be the same as the amount or proportion of unallowable costs included in the base year proposal used to establish the rate.

Direct and Indirect Costs

§ 200.412 Classification of costs.

There is no universal rule for classifying certain costs as direct or indirect costs. A cost may be direct for some specific service or function but indirect for the Federal award or other final cost objective. Therefore, each cost incurred for the same purpose in like circumstances must be treated consistently either as a direct or an indirect cost to avoid possible double-charging of Federal awards. Guidelines for determining direct and indirect costs charged to Federal awards are provided in this subpart.

§ 200.413 Direct costs.

(a) General.  Direct costs are those costs that can be identified specifically with a particular final cost objective, such as a Federal award, or other internally or externally funded activity, or that can be directly assigned to such activities relatively easily with a high degree of accuracy. Costs incurred for the same purpose in like circumstances must be treated consistently as direct or indirect costs. See § 200.405.

(b) Application to Federal awards.  The association of costs with a Federal award determines whether costs are direct or indirect. Costs charged directly to a Federal award are typically incurred specifically for that Federal award (including, for example, supplies needed to achieve the award's objectives and the proportion of employee compensation and fringe benefits expended in relation to that specific award). Costs that otherwise would be treated as indirect costs may also be considered direct costs if they are directly related to a specific award (including, for example, extraordinary utility consumption, the cost of materials supplied from stock or services rendered by specialized facilities, cybersecurity, integrated data systems, asset management systems, performance management costs, program evaluation costs, or other institutional service operations).

(c) Administrative and clerical staff salaries.  Administrative and clerical staff salaries should normally be treated as indirect costs. Direct charging of these costs may be appropriate only if they meet all of the following conditions:

(1) The administrative or clerical services are integral to a Federal award;

(2) Individuals involved can be specifically identified with a Federal award; and

(3) The costs are not also recovered as indirect costs.

(d) Minor items.  A direct cost of a minor amount may be treated as an indirect cost, for reasons of practicality, provided that it is treated consistently for all Federal and non-Federal purposes.

(e) Treatment of unallowable costs in determining indirect cost rates.  The costs of certain activities are not allowable as charges to Federal awards. Even though these costs are unallowable, they must be treated as direct costs for purposes of determining indirect cost rates and be allocated their equitable share of the recipient's or subrecipient's indirect costs if they represent activities which:

(1) Include the salaries of personnel;

(2) Occupy space; and

(3) Benefit from the recipient's or subrecipient's indirect costs.

(f) Treatment of certain costs for nonprofit organizations.  For nonprofit organizations, the costs of activities performed by the nonprofit organization primarily as a service to members, clients, or the general public when significant and necessary to the organization's mission must be treated as direct costs whether or not allowable, and be allocated an equitable share of indirect costs. Some examples of these types of activities include:

(1) Maintenance of membership rolls, subscriptions, publications, and related functions. See § 200.454.

(2) Providing services and information to members, the government, or the public. See §§ 200.454 and 200.450.

(3) Promotion, lobbying, and other forms of public relations. See §§ 200.421 and 200.450.

(4) Conferences (except those held to conduct the general administration of the recipient or subrecipient). See also § 200.432.

(5) Maintenance, protection, and investment of special funds not used in the recipient's or subrecipient's operation. See also § 200.442.

(6) Administration of group benefits on behalf of members or clients, including life and hospital insurance, annuity or retirement plans, and financial aid. See also § 200.431.

§ 200.414 Indirect costs.

(a) Facilities and administration classification.  For major Institutions of Higher Education (IHE) and major nonprofit organizations, indirect costs must be classified within two broad categories: “Facilities” and “Administration.” “Facilities” is defined as depreciation on buildings, equipment and capital improvements, interest on debt associated with certain buildings, equipment and capital improvements, and operations and maintenance expenses. “Administration” is defined as general administration and general expenses such as the director's office, accounting, personnel, and all other types of expenditures not listed specifically under one of the subcategories of “Facilities” (including cross allocations from other pools, where applicable). For nonprofit organizations, library expenses are included in the “Administration” category; for IHEs, they are included in the “Facilities” category. Major IHEs are defined as those required to use the Standard Format for Submission as noted in Appendix III. Major nonprofit organizations are those which receive more than $10 million in direct Federal funding.

(b) Diversity of nonprofit organizations.  It is not always possible to specify the types of costs that may be classified as indirect costs for nonprofit organizations due to the diversity of their accounting practices. The association of a cost with a Federal award is the determining factor in distinguishing direct from indirect costs. However, typical examples of indirect cost for many nonprofit organizations may include depreciation on buildings and equipment, the costs of operating and maintaining facilities, and general administration and general expenses, such as the salaries and expenses of executive officers, personnel administration, and accounting.

(c) Federal Agency Acceptance of Negotiated Indirect Cost Rates.  (See § 200.306.)

(1) Negotiated indirect cost rates must be accepted by all Federal agencies. A Federal agency may use a rate different from the negotiated rate for either a class of Federal awards or a single Federal award only when required by Federal statute or regulation, or when approved by the awarding Federal agency in accordance with paragraph (c)(3) of this section.

(2) The Federal agency must notify OMB of any approved deviations. The recipient or subrecipient may notify OMB of any disputes with Federal agencies regarding the application of a federally negotiated indirect cost rate.

(3) The Federal agency must implement, and make publicly available, the policies, procedures and general decision-making criteria that their programs will follow to seek and justify deviations from negotiated rates.

(4) The Federal agency must include, in the notice of funding opportunity, the policies relating to indirect cost rate reimbursement or cost share as approved under paragraph (e). As appropriate, the Federal agency should incorporate discussion of these policies into its outreach activities with applicants before posting a notice of funding opportunity. See § 200.204.

(d) Pass-through entities.  Pass-through entities are subject to the requirements in § 200.332(b)(4) and must accept all federally negotiated indirect costs rates for subrecipients.

(e) Appendices.  Requirements for development and submission of indirect cost rate proposals and cost allocation plans are contained in the following Appendices:

(1) Appendix III to Part 200—Indirect (F&A) Costs Identification and Assignment, and Rate Determination for Institutions of Higher Education (IHEs);

(2) Appendix IV to Part 200—Indirect (F&A) Costs Identification and Assignment, and Rate Determination for Nonprofit Organizations;

(3) Appendix V to Part 200—State/Local Government-wide Central Service Cost Allocation Plans;

(4) Appendix VI to Part 200—Public Assistance Cost Allocation Plans;

(5) Appendix VII to Part 200—States and Local Government and Indian Tribe Indirect Cost Proposals; and

(6) Appendix IX to Part 200—Hospital Cost Principles.

(f) De minimis rate.  Recipients and subrecipients that do not have a current Federal negotiated indirect cost rate (including provisional rate) may elect to charge a de minimis rate of up to 15 percent of modified total direct costs (MTDC). The recipient or subrecipient is authorized to determine the appropriate rate up to this limit. Federal agencies and pass-through entities may not require recipients and subrecipients to use a de minimis rate lower than the negotiated indirect cost rate or the rate elected pursuant to this subsection unless required by Federal statute or regulation. The de minimis rate must not be applied to cost reimbursement contracts issued directly by the Federal Government in accordance with the FAR. Recipients and subrecipients are not required to use the de minimis rate. When applying the de minimis rate, costs must be consistently charged as either direct or indirect costs and may not be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. The de minimis rate does not require documentation to justify its use and may be used indefinitely. Once elected, the recipient or subrecipient must use the de minimis rate for all Federal awards until the recipient or subrecipient chooses to receive a negotiated rate.

(g) One-time extension of indirect rates.  A recipient or subrecipient with a current Federal negotiated indirect cost rate may apply for a one-time extension of that agreement for up to four years. This extension will be subject to review and approval by the cognizant agency for indirect costs. If this extension is granted, the recipient or subrecipient may not request a rate review until the extension period ends. The recipient or subrecipient must re-apply to negotiate a new rate when the extension ends. After a new rate has been negotiated, the recipient or subrecipient may again apply for a one-time extension of the new rate in accordance with this paragraph.

§ 200.415 Required certifications.

(a) Financial reports must include a certification, signed by an official who is authorized to legally bind the recipient, which reads as follows: “By signing this report, I certify to the best of my knowledge and belief that the report is true, complete, and accurate, and the expenditures, disbursements and cash receipts are for the purposes and objectives set forth in the terms and conditions of the Federal award. I am aware that any false, fictitious, or fraudulent information, or the omission of any material fact, may subject me to criminal, civil or administrative penalties for fraud, false statements, false claims or otherwise. (U.S. Code Title 18, Section 1001 and Title 31, Sections 3729-3730 and 3801-3812).”

(b) Subrecipients under the Federal award must certify to the pass-through entity whenever applying for funds, requesting payment, and submitting financial reports: “I certify to the best of my knowledge and belief that the information provided herein is true, complete, and accurate. I am aware that the provision of false, fictitious, or fraudulent information, or the omission of any material fact, may subject me to criminal, civil, or administrative consequences including, but not limited to violations of U.S. Code Title 18, Sections 2, 1001, 1343 and Title 31, Sections 3729-3730 and 3801-3812.” Each such certification must be maintained pursuant to the requirements of § 200.334. This paragraph applies to all tiers of subrecipients.

(c) Certification of cost allocation plan or indirect cost rate proposal. Each cost allocation plan or indirect cost rate proposal must comply with the following:

(1) A proposal to establish a cost allocation plan or an indirect cost rate, whether submitted to a Federal cognizant agency for indirect costs or maintained on file by the recipient, must be certified by the recipient using the Certificate of Cost Allocation Plan or Certificate of Indirect Costs as set forth in appendices III through VII, and IX of this part. The certificate must be signed on behalf of the recipient by an individual at a level no lower than the vice president or chief financial officer of the recipient that submits the proposal.

(2) The Federal Government may either disallow all indirect costs or unilaterally establish an indirect cost rate when the recipient fails to submit a certified proposal for establishing a rate. This rate should be based upon audited historical data or other data furnished to the cognizant agency for indirect costs and for which it can be demonstrated that all unallowable costs have been excluded. The rate established must ensure that potentially unallowable costs are not reimbursed. Alternatively, the recipient may use the de minimis indirect cost rate. See § 200.414(f).

(d) Nonprofit organizations must certify that they did not meet the definition of a major nonprofit organization as defined in § 200.414(a), if applicable.

(e) The recipient must certify that the requirements and standards for lobbying (see § 200.450) have been met when submitting its indirect cost rate proposal.

Special Considerations for States, Local Governments and Indian Tribes

§ 200.416 Cost allocation plans and indirect cost proposals.

(a) Awards to states, local governments, and Indian Tribes are often implemented at the level of department within the State, local government, or Indian Tribe. A central service cost allocation plan is established to allow such department to claim a portion of centralized service costs that are incurred in proportion to the award's activities. Examples of centralized service costs may include motor pools, computer centers, purchasing, and accounting. Since Federal awards are performed within the individual operating agencies, there needs to be a process whereby these central service costs can be identified and assigned to benefitted activities on a reasonable and consistent basis. The central service cost allocation plan establishes this process.

(b) Individual departments typically charge Federal awards for indirect costs through an indirect cost rate. A separate indirect cost rate proposal for each operating department is usually necessary to claim indirect costs under Federal awards. Indirect costs include:

(1) The indirect costs originating in each operating department of the State, local government, or Indian Tribe carrying out Federal awards; and

(2) The costs of central governmental services distributed through the central service cost allocation plan and not otherwise treated as direct costs.

(c) The requirements for developing and submitting cost allocation plans (for central service costs and public assistance programs) and indirect cost rate proposals are contained in appendices V, VI, and VII of this part.

§ 200.417 Interagency service.

An operating department may provide services to another operating department of the same State, local government, or Indian Tribe. In these instances, the cost of services provided may include allowable direct costs of the service plus a pro-rated share of indirect costs. A standard indirect cost rate equal to 15 percent of the direct salaries and wages for providing the service (excluding overtime, shift premiums, and fringe benefits) may be used instead of determining the actual indirect costs of the service. These services do not include centralized services that are included in central service cost allocation plans described in Appendix V of this part.

Special Considerations for Institutions of Higher Education

§ 200.418 Costs incurred by states and local governments.

Costs incurred or paid by a State or local government on behalf of and in direct benefit to its IHEs are allowable. These costs include but are not limited to fringe benefit programs such as pension costs and Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) costs. These costs are allowable regardless of whether they are recorded in the accounting records of the institutions, subject to the following conditions:

(a) The costs meet the requirements of § 200.402-200.411;

(b) The costs are properly supported by approved cost allocation plans in accordance with the applicable cost accounting principles of this part; and

(c) The costs are not otherwise borne directly or indirectly by the Federal Government.

§ 200.419 Cost accounting standards.

An IHE that receive an aggregate total $50 million or more in Federal awards and instruments subject to this subpart (as specified in § 200.101) in its most recently completed fiscal year must comply with the Cost Accounting Standards Board's cost accounting standards located at 48 CFR 9905.501, 9905.502, 9905.505, and 9905.506. CAS-covered contracts and subcontracts awarded to the IHEs are subject to the broader range of CAS requirements at 48 CFR 9900 through 9999 and 48 CFR part 30 (FAR Part 30).

General Provisions for Selected Items of Cost

§ 200.420 Considerations for selected items of cost.

(a) This section provides principles to be applied in establishing the allowability of certain items involved in determining cost, in addition to other requirements of this subpart. These principles apply whether or not a particular cost item is properly treated as a direct or indirect cost.

(b) The following sections are not intended to be a comprehensive list of potential items of cost encountered under Federal awards. Failure to mention a particular item of cost, including as an example in certain sections, is not intended to imply that it is either allowable or unallowable. When determining the allowability for an item of cost, each case should be based on the treatment provided for similar or related items of cost and based on the principles described in §§ 200.402 through 200.411. In case of a discrepancy between the provisions of a specific Federal award and the provisions below, the Federal award governs. Criteria outlined in § 200.403 must be applied in determining allowability.

§ 200.421 Advertising and public relations.

(a) The term advertising costs means the costs of advertising media and corollary administrative costs. Advertising media includes, but is not limited to, magazines, newspapers, radio and television, direct mail, exhibits, and electronic or computer transmittals.

(b) The only allowable advertising costs are those which are solely for:

(1) The recruitment of personnel required by the recipient or subrecipient for the performance of a Federal award (See also § 200.463);

(2) The procurement of goods and services for the performance of a Federal award;

(3) The disposal of scrap or surplus materials acquired in the performance of a Federal award except when the recipient or subrecipient is reimbursed for disposal costs at a predetermined amount; or

(4) Program outreach (for example, recruiting project participants) and other specific purposes necessary to meet the Federal award requirements.

(c) The term “public relations” includes community relations and means those activities dedicated to maintaining the recipient's or subrecipient's image or maintaining or promoting understanding and favorable relations with the community or public at large or any segment of the public.

(d) The only allowable public relations costs are:

(1) Costs specifically required by the Federal award;

(2) Costs of communicating with the public and press about specific activities or accomplishments which result from the performance of the Federal award (these costs are considered necessary as part of the outreach effort for the Federal award); or

(3) Costs of conducting general liaison with news media and government public relations officers, to the extent that such activities are limited to communication and liaison necessary to keep the public informed on matters of public concern, such as notices of funding opportunities or financial matters.

(e) Unallowable advertising and public relations costs include the following:

(1) All advertising and public relations costs other than as specified in paragraphs (b) and (d) of this section;

(2) Costs of meetings, conventions, conferences, or other events related to other activities of the entity (see also § 200.432), including:

(i) Costs of displays, demonstrations, and exhibits;

(ii) Costs of meeting rooms, hospitality suites, and other special facilities used in conjunction with shows and other special events; and

(iii) Salaries and wages of employees engaged in setting up and displaying exhibits, making demonstrations, and providing briefings;

(3) Costs of promotional items and memorabilia;

(4) Costs of advertising and public relations designed solely to promote the recipient or subrecipient.

§ 200.422 Advisory councils.

An advisory council or committee is a body that provides advice to the management of such entities as corporations, organizations, or foundations. Costs incurred by both internal and external advisory councils or committees are allowable if authorized by statute, the Federal agency, or as an indirect cost where allocable to Federal awards. See § 200.444, which applies to States, local governments, and Indian Tribes.

§ 200.423 Alcoholic beverages.

The cost of alcoholic beverages is unallowable.

§ 200.424 Alumni activities.

Costs incurred by IHEs for, or in support of, alumni activities are unallowable.

§ 200.425 Audit services.

(a) A reasonably proportionate share of the costs of audits required by and performed in accordance with the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996 (31 U.S.C. 7501-7507), and the requirements of this part are allowable. However, the following audit costs are unallowable:

(1) Any costs when audits required by the Single Audit Act and subpart F of this part have not been conducted, or have been conducted but not in accordance with the requirements; and

(2) Except as provided for in paragraph (c) of this section, any costs of auditing a non-Federal entity that is exempted from having an audit conducted under the Single Audit Act and subpart F of this part because its expenditures under Federal awards are less than $1,000,000 during its fiscal year.”

(b) The costs of a financial statement audit of a recipient or subrecipient that does not currently have a Federal award may be included in the indirect cost pool for a cost allocation plan or indirect cost proposal.

(c) Pass-through entities may charge Federal awards for the cost of agreed-upon procedures engagements to monitor subrecipients (in accordance with §§ 200.331-333) exempt from having an audit conducted under the Single Audit Act and the requirements of this part. This cost is allowable only if the agreed-upon procedures engagements are:

(1) Conducted in accordance with GAGAS or applicable international attestation standards, as appropriate;

(2) Paid for and arranged by the pass-through entity; and

(3) Limited in scope to one or more of the following types of compliance requirements: activities allowed or unallowed; allowable costs/cost principles; eligibility; and reporting.

§ 200.426 Bad debts.

Bad debts (debts determined to be uncollectable), including losses (whether actual or estimated) arising from uncollectable accounts and other claims, are unallowable. Related collection costs, and related legal costs, arising from such debts are also unallowable. See § 200.428.

§ 200.427 Bonding costs.

(a) Bonding costs arise when the Federal agency requires assurance against financial loss to itself or others because of an act or default of the recipient or subrecipient. They also arise when the recipient or subrecipient requires similar assurance, including bonds as bid, performance, payment, advance payment, infringement, and fidelity bonds for employees and officials.

(b) Costs of bonding required under the Federal award's terms and conditions are allowable.

(c) Costs of bonding required by the recipient or subrecipient in the general conduct of its operations are allowable as an indirect cost to the extent that such bonding is in accordance with sound business practice and the rates and premiums are reasonable under the circumstances.

§ 200.428 Collections of improper payments.

The costs incurred by a recipient or subrecipient to recover improper payments, including improper overpayments, are allowable as either direct or indirect costs, as appropriate. The recipient or subrecipient may use the amounts collected in accordance with cash management standards described in § 200.305.

§ 200.429 Commencement and convocation costs.

For IHEs, costs incurred for commencements and convocations are unallowable, except as activity costs provided for in Appendix III, (B)(9) Student Administration and Services.

§ 200.430 Compensation—personal services.

(a) General.  Compensation for personal services includes all remuneration, paid currently or accrued, for services of employees rendered during the period of performance under the Federal award, including but not necessarily limited to wages and salaries. Compensation for personal services may also include fringe benefits addressed in § 200.431. Costs of compensation are allowable to the extent that they satisfy the specific requirements of this part and that the total compensation for individual employees:

(1) Is reasonable for the services rendered and conforms to the established written policy of the recipient or subrecipient consistently applied to both Federal and non-Federal activities;

(2) Follows an appointment made in accordance with the recipient's or subrecipient's laws, rules, or written policies and meets the requirements of Federal statute, where applicable; and

(3) Is determined and supported as provided in paragraph (g) of this section, when applicable.

(b) Reasonableness.  Compensation for employees engaged in work on Federal awards will be reasonable to the extent that it is consistent with that paid for similar work in other activities of the recipient or subrecipient. In cases where the kinds of employees required for Federal awards are not found in the other activities of the recipient or subrecipient, compensation will be considered reasonable to the extent that it is comparable to that paid for similar work in the labor market in which the recipient or subrecipient competes for the kind of employees involved.

(c) Professional activities outside the recipient or subrecipient.  Unless the Federal agency expressly authorizes an arrangement, a recipient or subrecipient must follow its written policies and procedures concerning the permissible extent of professional services that can be provided outside the recipient or subrecipient for non-organizational compensation. Where the recipient or subrecipient does not have written policies or procedures, or they do not adequately define the permissible extent of consulting or other non-organizational activities undertaken for extra outside pay, the Federal Government may require the recipient or subrecipient to allocate the effort of professional staff working on Federal awards between:

(1) Recipient or subrecipient activities, and

(2) Non-organizational professional activities. Appropriate arrangements governing compensation must be negotiated on a case-by-case basis if the Federal agency considers the extent of non-organizational professional effort excessive or inconsistent with the conflicts-of-interest terms and conditions of the Federal award.

(d) Unallowable costs. (1) Costs unallowable under other sections of these principles must not be allowable under this section solely because they constitute personnel compensation.

(2) The allowable compensation for certain employees is subject to a ceiling in accordance with Federal statute. See 10 U.S.C. 3744(a)(16), 41 U.S.C. 1127, and 41 U.S.C. 4304(a)(16) for the ceiling amount, covered compensation subject to the ceiling, covered employees, and other relevant provisions for cost-reimbursement contracts. For other types of Federal awards, other statutory ceilings may apply.

(e) Special considerations.  Special considerations in determining the allowability of compensation will be given to any change in a recipient's or subrecipient's compensation policy resulting in a substantial increase in its employees' level of compensation (particularly when the change was concurrent with an increase in the ratio of Federal awards to other activities) or any change in the treatment of allowability of specific types of compensation due to changes in Federal policy.

(f) Incentive compensation.  Incentive compensation to employees based on cost reduction, efficient performance, suggestion awards, or safety awards is allowable to the extent that the overall compensation is determined to be reasonable and such costs are paid or accrued according to an agreement entered into in good faith between the recipient or subrecipient and the employees before the services were rendered, or according to an established plan followed by the recipient or subrecipient so consistently as to imply, in effect, an agreement to make such payment.

(g) Standards for Documentation of Personnel Expenses. (1) Charges to Federal awards for salaries and wages must be based on records that accurately reflect the work performed. These records must:

(i) Be supported by a system of internal control that provides reasonable assurance that the charges are accurate, allowable, and properly allocated;

(ii) Be incorporated into the official records of the recipient or subrecipient;

(iii) Reasonably reflect the total activity for which the employee is compensated by the recipient or subrecipient, not exceeding 100 percent of compensated activities (for IHEs, this is the IBS);

(iv) Encompass federally-assisted and all other activities compensated by the recipient or subrecipient on an integrated basis but may include the use of subsidiary records as defined in the recipient's or subrecipient's written policy;

(v) Comply with the established accounting policies and procedures of the recipient or subrecipient (See paragraph (i)(1)(ii) of this section for treatment of incidental work for IHEs.); and

(vi) Support the distribution of the employee's salary or wages among specific activities or cost objectives if the employee works on more than one Federal award; a Federal award and non-Federal award; an indirect cost activity and a direct cost activity; two or more indirect activities allocated using different allocation bases; or an unallowable activity and a direct or indirect cost activity.

(vii) Budget estimates (meaning, estimates determined before the services are performed) alone do not qualify as support for charges to Federal awards, but may be used for interim accounting purposes, provided that:

(A) The system for establishing the estimates produces reasonable approximations of the activity performed;

(B) Significant changes in the related work activity (as defined by the recipient's or subrecipient's written policies) are promptly identified and entered into the records. Short-term (such as one or two months) fluctuations between workload categories do not need to be considered as long as the distribution of salaries and wages is reasonable over the longer term; and

(C) The recipient's or subrecipient's system of internal controls includes processes to perform periodic after-the-fact reviews of interim charges made to a Federal award based on budget estimates. All necessary adjustments must be made so that the final amount charged to the Federal award is accurate, allowable, and properly allocated.

(viii) Because practices vary as to the activity constituting a full workload (for example, the Institutional Base Salary (IBS) for IHEs), records may reflect categories of activities expressed as a percentage distribution of total activities.

(ix) It is recognized that teaching, research, service, and administration are often inextricably intermingled in an academic setting. Therefore, a precise assessment of factors contributing to costs is not required when IHEs record salaries and wages charged to Federal awards.

(2) For records that meet the standards required in paragraph (g)(1) of this section, the recipient or subrecipient is not required to provide additional support or documentation for the work performed other than that referenced in paragraph (g)(3) of this section.

(3) In accordance with Department of Labor regulations implementing the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) (29 CFR part 516), charges for the salaries and wages of nonexempt employees, in addition to the supporting documentation described in this section, must also be supported by records indicating the total number of hours worked each day.

(4) Salaries and wages of employees used in meeting cost sharing requirements on Federal awards must be supported in the same manner as salaries and wages claimed for reimbursement from Federal awards.

(5) States, local governments, and Indian Tribes may use substitute processes or systems for allocating salaries and wages to Federal awards either in place of or in addition to the records described in paragraph (g)(1) of this section if approved by the cognizant agency for indirect cost. Such systems may include, but are not limited to, random moment sampling, “rolling” time studies, case counts, or other quantifiable measures of work performed.

(i) Substitute systems that use sampling methods (primarily for Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), Medicaid, and other public assistance programs) must meet acceptable statistical sampling standards, including:

(A) The sampling universe must include all of the employees whose salaries and wages are to be allocated based on sample results except as provided in paragraph (g)(5)(iii);

(B) The sample must cover the entire period involved; and

(C) The results must be statistically valid and applied to the period being sampled.

(ii) Allocating charges for the sampled employees' supervisors and clerical and support staff, based on the results of the sampled employees, will be acceptable.

(iii) Less than full compliance with the statistical sampling standards noted in paragraph (5)(i) may be accepted by the cognizant agency for indirect costs if it concludes that the amounts allocated to Federal awards will be minimal or if it concludes that the system proposed by the recipient or subrecipient will result in lower costs to Federal awards than a system which complies with the standards.

(6) Cognizant agencies for indirect costs are encouraged to approve alternative proposals based on outcomes and milestones for program performance when these are clearly documented. These plans are acceptable as an alternative to requirements in paragraph (g)(1) of this section when approved by the cognizant agency for indirect costs.

(7) For Federal awards of similar purpose activity or instances of approved blended funding, a recipient or subrecipient may submit performance plans that incorporate funds from multiple Federal awards and account for their combined use based on performance-oriented metrics, provided the plans are approved in advance by all involved Federal agencies. In these instances, the recipient or subrecipient must submit a request for waiver of the requirements based on documentation that describes the method of charging costs, relates the charging of costs to the specific activity that is applicable to all fund sources, and is based on quantifiable measures of the activity in relation to time charged.

(8) For a recipient or subrecipient whose records do not meet the standards described in this section, the Federal Government may require personnel activity reports, including prescribed certifications, or equivalent documentation supporting the records as required in this section.

(h) Nonprofit organizations.  This paragraph (h) provides guidance specific to only nonprofit organizations. For compensation to members of nonprofit organizations, trustees, directors, associates, officers, or the immediate families thereof, a determination must be made that the compensation is reasonable for the actual personal services rendered rather than a distribution of earnings above actual costs. Compensation may include director's and executive committee member's fees, incentive awards, off-site or incentive pay, location allowances, hardship pay, and cost-of-living differentials.

(i) Institutions of Higher Education (IHEs).  This paragraph provides guidance specific to only IHEs.

(1) Determining allowable personnel costs.  Certain conditions require special consideration and possible limitations in determining allowable personnel compensation costs under Federal awards. Among such conditions are the following:

(i) Allowable activities. Charges to Federal awards may include reasonable amounts for activities contributing and directly related to work under an agreement, such as delivering special lectures about specific aspects of the ongoing activity, writing reports and articles, developing and maintaining protocols (human, animals, etcetera), managing substances/chemicals, managing and securing project-specific data, coordinating research subjects, participating in appropriate seminars, consulting with colleagues and graduate students, and attending meetings and conferences.

(ii) Incidental activities. Incidental activities for which supplemental compensation is allowable under the written institutional policy (at a rate not to exceed institutional base salary) do not need to be included in the records described in paragraph (g). To charge payments of incidental activities directly, such activities must either be expressly authorized in the Federal award budget or receive prior written approval by the Federal agency.

(2) Salary basis.  Charges for work performed on Federal awards by faculty members during the academic year are allowable at the institutional base salary (IBS) rate. Except as noted in paragraph (i)(1)(ii), in no event will charges to Federal awards, irrespective of the basis of computation, exceed the proportionate share of the IBS for that period. This principle applies to all members of the faculty at an institution. IBS is the annual compensation paid by an IHE for an individual's appointment, whether that individual's time is spent on research, instruction, administration, or other activities. IBS excludes any income an individual earns outside of duties performed for the IHE. Unless there is prior approval by the Federal agency, charges of a faculty member's salary to a Federal award may not exceed the proportionate share of the IBS for the period during which the faculty member worked on the Federal award.

(3) Intra-Institution of Higher Education (IHE) consulting.  Intra-IHE consulting by faculty should be undertaken as an IHE responsibility requiring no compensation in addition to IBS. However, in unusual cases where consultation is across departmental lines or involves a separate or remote operation, and the work performed by the faculty members is in addition to their regular responsibilities, any charges for such work representing additional compensation above IBS are allowable provided that such consulting arrangements are expressly authorized in the Federal award or approved in writing by the Federal agency.

(4) Extra service pay.  Extra service pay typically represents overload compensation, subject to institutional compensation policies for services above and beyond IBS. Where extra service pay results from Intra-IHE consulting, it is subject to the same requirements of paragraph (b) of this section. It is allowable if all of the following conditions are met:

(i) The IHE establishes consistent written policies which apply uniformly to all faculty members, not just those working on Federal awards.

(ii) The IHE establishes a consistent written definition of work covered by IBS, which is specific enough to determine conclusively when work beyond that level has occurred. This definition may be described in appointment letters or other documentation.

(iii) The supplementation amount paid is commensurate with the IBS pay rate and additional work performed. See paragraph (i)(2) of this section.

(iv) The salaries, as supplemented, fall within the salary structure and pay ranges established by and documented in writing or otherwise applicable to the IHE.

(v) The total salaries charged to Federal awards, including extra service payments, are subject to the standards of documentation as described in paragraph (g).

(5) Periods outside the academic year. (i) Except as specified for teaching activity in paragraph (i)(5)(ii) of this section, charges for work performed by faculty members on Federal awards during periods not included in the base salary period must be at a rate not more than the IBS.

(ii) Charges for teaching activities performed by faculty members on Federal awards during periods not included in IBS period must be based on the written policy of the IHE governing compensation to faculty members for teaching assignments during such periods.

(6) Part-time faculty.  Charges for work performed on Federal awards by faculty members having only part-time appointments must be determined at a rate not more than that regularly paid for part-time assignments.

(7) Sabbatical leave costs.  Rules for sabbatical leave are as follows:

(i) Costs of leaves of absence by employees for performance of graduate work or sabbatical study, travel, or research are allowable, provided the IHE has a uniform written policy on sabbatical leave for persons engaged in instruction and persons engaged in research. These costs must be allocated equitably among all related activities of the IHE.

(ii) Where sabbatical leave is included in fringe benefits for which a cost is determined for assessment as a direct charge, the aggregate amount of such assessments applicable to all work of the institution during the base period must be reasonable in relation to the IHE's actual experience under its sabbatical leave policy.

(8) Salary rates for non-faculty members.  Non-faculty full-time professional personnel may also earn “extra service pay” in accordance with the IHE's written policy and paragraph (i)(1)(i).

§ 200.431 Compensation—fringe benefits.

(a) General.  Fringe benefits are allowances and services employers provide to their employees as compensation in addition to regular salaries and wages. Fringe benefits include, but are not limited to, the costs of leave, employee insurance, pensions, and unemployment benefits. Except as provided elsewhere in these principles, the costs of fringe benefits are allowable provided that the benefits are reasonable and are required by law, an organization-employee agreement, or an established policy of the recipient or subrecipient.

(b) Leave.  The cost of fringe benefits in the form of regular compensation paid to employees during periods of authorized absences from the job, such as for annual leave, family-related leave, sick leave, holidays, court leave, military leave, administrative leave, and other similar benefits, are allowable if all of the following criteria are met:

(1) They are provided under established written leave policies;

(2) The costs are equitably allocated to all related activities, including Federal awards; and,

(3) The accounting basis (cash or accrual) selected for costing each type of leave is consistently followed by the recipient or subrecipient or a specified grouping of employees.

(i) When a recipient or subrecipient uses the cash basis of accounting, the cost of leave is recognized in the period that the leave is taken and paid for. Payments for unused leave when an employee retires or terminates employment are allowable in the year of payment and should be allocated as a general administrative expense to all activities or included in the fringe benefit rate.

(ii) The accrual basis may be only used for those types of leave for which a liability as defined by GAAP exists when the leave is earned. When a recipient or subrecipient uses the accrual basis of accounting, allowable leave costs are the lesser of the amount accrued or funded.

(c) Fringe benefits.  The cost of fringe benefits in the form of employer contributions or expenses for social security; employee life, health, unemployment, and worker's compensation insurance (except as indicated in § 200.447); pension plan costs; and other similar benefits are allowable, provided such benefits are permitted under established written policies. The recipient or subrecipient must allocate fringe benefits to Federal awards and all other activities in a manner consistent with the pattern of benefits attributable to the individuals or group(s) of employees whose salaries and wages are chargeable to such Federal awards and other activities, and charged as direct or indirect costs following the recipient's or subrecipient's accounting practices.

(d) Cost objectives.  The recipient or subrecipient may assign fringe benefits to cost objectives by identifying specific benefits to specific individual employees or by allocating them based on entity-wide salaries and wages of the employees receiving the benefits. When the allocation method is used, separate allocations must be made to selective groupings of employees unless the recipient or subrecipient demonstrates that costs in relationship to salaries and wages do not differ significantly for different groups of employees.

(e) Insurance.  See also § 200.447(d)(1) and (2).

(1) Provisions for a reserve under a self-insurance program for unemployment compensation or workers' compensation are allowable to the extent that the provisions represent reasonable estimates of the liabilities for such compensation and the types of coverage, the extent of coverage, and rates and premiums would have been allowable had insurance been purchased to cover the risks. However, provisions for self-insured liabilities which do not become payable for more than one year after the provision is made must not exceed the present value of the liability.

(2) Insurance costs on the lives of trustees, officers, or other employees holding positions of similar responsibility are allowable only to the extent that the insurance represents additional compensation. The cost of such insurance is unallowable when the recipient or subrecipient is named as beneficiary.

(3) Actual claims paid to or on behalf of employees or former employees for workers' compensation, unemployment compensation, severance pay, and similar employee benefits (for example, post-retirement health benefits) are allowable in the year of payment provided that the recipient or subrecipient follows a consistent costing policy.

(f) Automobiles.  That portion of automobile costs furnished by the recipient or subrecipient that relates to personal use by employees (including transportation to and from work) is unallowable as a fringe benefit or indirect costs regardless of whether the cost is reported as taxable income to the employees.

(g) Pension plan costs.  Pension plan costs incurred in accordance with the established written policies of the recipient or subrecipient are allowable, provided that:

(1) Such policies meet the test of reasonableness.

(2) The methods of cost allocation are not discriminatory.

(3) The cost assigned to each fiscal year should be determined in accordance with GAAP, except for State and local governments.

(4) The costs assigned to a given fiscal year are funded for all plan participants within six months after the end of that year. However, increases to normal and past service pension costs caused by a delay in funding the actuarial liability beyond 30 calendar days after each quarter of the year to which such costs are assignable are unallowable. The recipient or subrecipient may follow the “Cost Accounting Standard for Composition and Measurement of Pension Costs” (48 CFR 9904.412).

(5) Premiums for pension plan termination insurance that are paid according to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1301-1461) are allowable. Late payment charges on such premiums are unallowable. Excise taxes on accumulated funding deficiencies and other penalties imposed under ERISA are unallowable.

(6) Pension plan costs may be computed using a pay-as-you-go method or an actuarial cost method recognized by GAAP and following the recipient's or subrecipient's established written policies.

(i) For pension plans financed on a pay-as-you-go method, allowable costs will be limited to those representing actual payments to retirees or their beneficiaries.

(ii) Pension costs calculated using an actuarial cost method recognized by GAAP are allowable for a given fiscal year if they are funded for that year within six months after the end of that year. Costs funded after six months (or a later period agreed to by the cognizant agency for indirect costs) are allowable in the year funded. The cognizant agency for indirect costs may agree to an extension if an appropriate adjustment is made to compensate for the timing of the charges to the Federal Government and related Federal reimbursement and the recipient's or subrecipient's contribution to the pension fund. Adjustments may be made by cash refund or other equitable procedures to compensate the Federal Government for the time value of Federal reimbursements in excess of contributions to the pension fund.

(iii) Amounts funded by the recipient or subrecipient in excess of the actuarially determined amount for a fiscal year may be used as the recipient's or subrecipient's contribution in future periods.

(iv) When a recipient or subrecipient establishes or converts to an acceptable actuarial cost method, as defined by GAAP, and funds pension costs in accordance with this method, the unfunded liability at the time of conversion is allowable if amortized over a period of years in accordance with GAAP.

(v) Payments for unfunded pension costs must be charged in accordance with the allocation principles of this subpart. Specifically, the recipient or subrecipient may not charge unfunded pension costs directly to a Federal award if those unfunded pension costs are not allocable to that award.

(vi) The recipient or subrecipient must provide the Federal Government an equitable share of any previously allowed pension costs (including subsequent earnings) that revert or inure to the recipient or subrecipient through a refund, withdrawal, or other credit.

(h) Post-retirement health.  A post-retirement health plan (PRHP) refers to the costs of health insurance or health services not included in a pension plan covered by paragraph (g) for retirees and their spouses, dependents, and survivors. PRHP costs may be computed using a pay-as-you-go method or an actuarial cost method recognized by GAAP and following the recipient's or subrecipient's established written policies.

(1) For PRHP financed on a pay-as-you-go method, allowable costs will be limited to those representing actual payments to retirees or their beneficiaries.

(2) PRHP costs calculated using an actuarial cost method recognized by GAAP are allowable for a given fiscal year if they are funded for that year within six months after the end of that year. Costs funded after six months (or a later period agreed to by the cognizant agency for indirect costs) are allowable in the year funded. The cognizant agency for indirect costs may agree to an extension if an appropriate adjustment is made to compensate for the timing of the charges to the Federal Government and related Federal reimbursement and the recipient's or subrecipient's contributions to the PRHP fund. Adjustments may be made by cash refund, reduction in the current year's PRHP costs, or other equitable procedures to compensate the Federal Government for the time value of Federal reimbursements in excess of contributions to the PRHP fund.

(3) Amounts funded by the recipient or subrecipient in excess of the actuarially determined amount for a fiscal year may be used as the recipient's or subrecipient's contribution in future periods.

(4) If a recipient or subrecipient establishes or converts to an actuarial cost method and funds PRHP costs in accordance with this method, the initial unfunded liability attributable to prior years is allowable if amortized over a period of years in accordance with GAAP, or, if no such GAAP period exists, over a period negotiated with the cognizant agency for indirect costs.

(5) Payments for unfunded PRHP costs must be charged in accordance with the allocation principles of this subpart. Specifically, the recipient or subrecipient may not charge unfunded PRHP costs directly to a Federal award if those unfunded PRHP costs are not allocable to that award.

(6) To be allowable in the current year, the PRHP costs must be paid either to:

(i) An insurer or other benefit provider as current year costs or premiums; or

(ii) An insurer or trustee that will maintain a trust fund or reserve for the sole purpose of providing post-retirement benefits to retirees and other beneficiaries.

(7) The recipient or subrecipient must provide the Federal Government an equitable share of any previously allowed post-retirement benefit costs (including subsequent earnings) that revert or inure to the recipient or subrecipient through a refund, withdrawal, or other credit.

(i) Severance pay. (1) Severance pay, also commonly referred to as dismissal wages, is a payment in addition to regular salaries and wages, by recipients and subrecipients to workers whose employment is being terminated. Severance pay is allowable only to the extent that, in each case, it is required by:

(i) Law;

(ii) Employer-employee agreement;

(iii) Established policy that constitutes, in effect, an implied agreement on the recipient's or subrecipient's part; or

(iv) Circumstances of the particular employment.

(2) Costs of severance payments are divided into two categories as follows:

(i) Actual severance payments for normal turnover must be allocated to all activities; or, where the recipient or subrecipient provides for a reserve for normal severances, such method is acceptable if the charge to current operations is reasonable in light of payments made for normal severances over a representative past period, and if amounts charged are allocated to all activities of the recipient or subrecipient.

(ii) Measuring the costs of abnormal or mass severance pay by means of an accrual method will not achieve equity for both parties. Therefore, accruals are not allowable. However, the Federal Government recognizes its responsibility to contribute its fair share toward a specific payment. Prior approval by the Federal agency or cognizant agency for indirect cost, as appropriate, is required.

(3) Costs incurred in severance pay packages that are in excess of the standard severance pay provided by the recipient or subrecipient to an employee upon termination of employment and that are paid to the employee contingent upon a change in management control over, or ownership of, the recipient's or subrecipient's assets, are unallowable.

(4) Severance payments to foreign nationals employed by the recipient or subrecipient outside the United States, to the extent that the amount exceeds the customary or prevailing practices for the recipient or subrecipient in the United States, are unallowable unless they are required by applicable foreign law or necessary for the performance of Federal programs and approved by the Federal agency.

(5) Severance payments to foreign nationals employed by the recipient or subrecipient outside the United States due to the termination of the foreign national as a result of the closing of, or curtailment of activities by, the recipient or subrecipient in that country, are unallowable unless they are either:

(i) Required by applicable foreign law; or

(ii) Necessary for the performance of Federal programs and approved by the Federal agency.

(j) For IHEs only. (1) Fringe benefits in the form of undergraduate and graduate tuition or tuition remission for individual employees are allowable, provided such benefits are granted in accordance with established written policies of the IHE and are distributed to all IHE activities on an equitable basis. Tuition benefits for family members other than the employee are unallowable.

(2) Fringe benefits in the form of undergraduate and graduate tuition or tuition remission for individual employees not employed by the IHE are limited to the tax-free amount allowed by the Internal Revenue Code as amended (26 U.S.C. 127).

(3) IHEs may offer employees tuition waivers or reductions, provided that the benefit does not discriminate in favor of highly compensated employees. Employees can exercise these benefits at other institutions according to institutional policy. See § 200.466, for treatment of tuition remission provided to students.

(k) Fringe benefit programs and other benefit costs. (1) For IHEs whose costs are paid by a State or local government, fringe benefit programs (such as pension costs and FICA) and any other benefits costs incurred specifically on behalf of, and in direct benefit to, the IHE, are allowable, subject to the following:

(i) The costs meet the requirements of Basic Considerations in §§ 200.402 through 200.411;

(ii) The costs are properly supported by approved cost allocation plans in accordance with applicable Federal cost accounting principles; and

(iii) The costs are not otherwise borne directly or indirectly by the Federal Government.

(2) The allowability of these costs for the IHE does not depend on whether they are recorded in the accounting records of the IHE.

[89 FR 30136, Apr. 22, 2024, as amended at 89 FR 79732, Oct. 1, 2024]

§ 200.432 Conferences.

A conference means an event whose primary purpose is to disseminate technical information beyond the recipient or subrecipient and is necessary and reasonable for successful performance under the Federal award. Allowable conference costs may include the rental of facilities, speakers' fees, attendance fees, costs of meals and refreshments, local transportation, and other items incidental to such conferences unless further restricted by the terms and conditions of the Federal award. The costs of identifying and providing locally available dependent-care resources for participants are allowable as needed. Conference hosts/sponsors must exercise discretion and judgment in ensuring that conference costs are appropriate, necessary, and managed to minimize costs to the Federal award. The Federal agency may authorize exceptions for programs including Indian Tribes, children, and the elderly. See also §§ 200.438, 200.456, and 200.475.

§ 200.433 Contingency provisions.

(a) Contingency provisions are part of a budget estimate of future costs (typically of large construction projects, IT systems, or other items approved by the Federal agency) which are associated with possible events or conditions arising from causes for which the precise outcome is indeterminable at the time of estimate and that are likely to result, in the aggregate, in additional costs for the approved activity or project. Contingency amounts for major project scope changes, unforeseen risks, or extraordinary events must not be included in the budget estimates for a Federal award.

(b) It is permissible for contingency amounts other than those excluded in paragraph (a) of this section to be explicitly included in budget estimates to the extent necessary to improve their precision. Contingency amounts must be estimated using broadly-accepted cost estimating methodologies, specified in the budget documentation of the Federal award, and accepted by the Federal agency. As such, contingency amounts are to be included in the Federal award. In order for actual costs incurred to be allowable, they must comply with the cost principles and other requirements of this part (see §§ 200.300 and 200.403), be necessary and reasonable for proper and efficient accomplishment of project or program objectives, and be verifiable from the recipient's or subrecipient's records.

(c) Payments to a recipient's or subrecipient's “contingency reserve” or any similar payment made for events the occurrence of which cannot be foretold with certainty as to the time or intensity, or with an assurance of their happening, are unallowable, except as noted in §§ 200.431 and 200.447.

§ 200.434 Contributions and donations.

(a) Costs of contributions and donations, including cash, property, and services, from the recipient or subrecipient to other entities are unallowable.

(b) The value of services and property donated (that is, in-kind donations) to the recipient or subrecipient may not be charged to the Federal award either as a direct or indirect cost. The value of donated services and property may be used to meet cost sharing requirements (see § 200.306). Depreciation on donated assets is permitted so long as the donated property is not counted towards meeting cost sharing requirements (see § 200.436).

(c) Services donated or volunteered to the recipient or subrecipient may be provided by professional and technical personnel, consultants, and other skilled and unskilled labor. The value of these services may not be charged to the Federal award as a direct or indirect cost. However, the value of donated services may be used to meet cost sharing requirements in accordance with the provisions of § 200.306.

(d) To the extent feasible, services donated to the recipient or subrecipient will be supported by the same methods used to support the allocability of regular personnel services.

(e) The following provisions apply to nonprofit organizations. The value of services donated to a nonprofit organization and used in the performance of a direct cost activity must be considered in the determination of the recipient's or subrecipient's indirect cost rate(s) and, accordingly, must be allocated a proportionate share of applicable indirect costs when the following circumstances exist:

(1) The aggregate value of the services is material;

(2) The services are supported by a significant amount of the indirect costs incurred by the recipient or subrecipient;

(i) In those instances where there is no basis for determining the fair market value of the services rendered, the recipient or subrecipient and the cognizant agency for indirect costs must negotiate an appropriate allocation of indirect cost to the services.

(ii) Where donated services directly benefit a project supported by the Federal award, the indirect costs allocated to the services will be considered as a part of the project's total costs. Such indirect costs may be reimbursed under the Federal award or used to meet cost sharing requirements.

(f) Fair market value of donated services must be computed as described in § 200.306.

(g) Personal property and use of space.

(1) Donated personal property and use of space may be furnished to a recipient or subrecipient. The value of the personal property and space may not be charged to the Federal award either as a direct or indirect cost.

(2) The value of the donations of personal property and use of space may be used to meet cost sharing requirements described in § 200.300. The recipient or subrecipient must value the donations in accordance with § 200.300. Where the recipient or subrecipient treats donations as indirect costs, indirect cost rates must separate the value of the donations so that reimbursement is not made.

§ 200.435 Defense and prosecution of criminal and civil proceedings, claims, appeals and patent infringements.

(a) Definitions for this section —(1) Conviction  means a judgment or conviction of a criminal offense by any court of competent jurisdiction, whether entered upon verdict or a plea, including a conviction due to a plea of nolo contendere.

(2) Costs  include the services that bear a direct relationship to a judicial or administrative proceeding and provided by in-house or private counsel, accountants, consultants, or others engaged to assist the recipient or subrecipient before, during, or after the commencement of that proceeding.

(3) Fraud  means:

(i) Acts of fraud or corruption or attempts to defraud the Federal Government or to corrupt its agents,

(ii) Acts that constitute a cause for debarment or suspension (as specified in agency regulations), and

(iii) Acts that violate the False Claims Act (31 U.S.C. 3729-3732) or the Anti-kickback Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7b(b)).

(4) Penalty  does not include restitution, reimbursement, or compensatory damages.

(5) Proceeding  includes an investigation.

(b) Costs. (1) Except as otherwise described herein, costs incurred in connection with any criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding (including the filing of a false certification) commenced by the Federal Government, a State, local government, or foreign government, or joined by the Federal Government (including a proceeding under the False Claims Act), against the recipient or subrecipient, (or commenced by third parties or a current or former employee of the recipient or subrecipient who submits a whistleblower complaint of reprisal in accordance with 10 U.S.C. 4701 or 41 U.S.C. 4712), are not allowable if the proceeding:

(i) Relates to a violation of, or failure to comply with, a Federal, State, local or foreign statute, regulation, or the terms and conditions of the Federal award by the recipient or subrecipient (including its agents and employees); and

(ii) Results in any of the following dispositions:

(A) In a criminal proceeding, a conviction.

(B) In a civil or administrative proceeding involving an allegation of fraud or similar misconduct, a determination of recipient or subrecipient liability.

(C) In the case of any civil or administrative proceeding, the disallowance of costs, the imposition of a monetary penalty, or an order issued by the Federal agency head or delegate to the recipient or subrecipient to take corrective action under 10 U.S.C. 4701 or 41 U.S.C. 4712.

(D) A final decision by an appropriate Federal official to debar or suspend the recipient or subrecipient, to rescind or void a Federal award, or to terminate a Federal award because of a violation or failure to comply with a statute, regulation, or the terms and conditions of the Federal award.

(E) A disposition by consent or compromise if the action could have resulted in any of the dispositions described in paragraphs (b)(1)(ii)(A) through (D) of this section.

(2) If more than one proceeding involves the same alleged misconduct, the costs of all such proceedings are unallowable if any results in one of the dispositions shown in paragraph (b) of this section.

(c) Allowability of costs for proceeding commenced by Federal Government.  If a proceeding referred to in paragraph (b) of this section is commenced by the Federal Government and is resolved by consent or compromise pursuant to an agreement by the recipient or subrecipient and the Federal Government, then the costs incurred may be allowed to the extent expressly authorized in the agreement.

(d) Allowability of costs for proceeding commenced by State, local, or foreign government.  If a proceeding referred to in paragraph (b) of this section is commenced by a State, local or foreign government, then the costs incurred may be allowed if the authorized Federal official determines that the costs were incurred as a result of:

(1) A specific term or condition of the Federal award, or

(2) Specific written direction of an authorized official of the Federal agency.

(e) Allowability of costs in general.  Costs incurred in connection with proceedings described in paragraph (b), and not made unallowable by that paragraph, may be allowed to the extent that:

(1) The costs are reasonable and necessary for the administration of the Federal award and activities required to deal with the proceeding and the underlying cause of action;

(2) Payment of the reasonable, necessary, allocable and otherwise allowable costs incurred is not prohibited by any other provision(s) of the Federal award;

(3) The costs are not recovered from the Federal Government or a third party, either directly as a result of the proceeding or otherwise; and,

(4) An authorized Federal official has determined the percentage of costs allowed considering the complexity of litigation, generally accepted principles governing the award of legal fees in civil actions involving the United States, and other factors that may be appropriate. This percentage must not exceed 80 percent unless an agreement under paragraph (c) has explicitly considered this limitation and permitted a higher percentage. In that case, the total amount of costs incurred may be allowable.

(f) Major Fraud Act.  Costs incurred by the recipient or subrecipient in connection with the defense of suits brought by its employees or ex-employees under section 2 of the Major Fraud Act of 1988 (18 U.S.C. 1031), including the cost of all relief necessary to make the employee whole, where the recipient or subrecipient was found liable or settled, are unallowable.

(g) Un-allowability of costs for prosecuting claims against Federal Government.  Costs for prosecuting claims against the Federal Government, including appeals of final Federal agency decisions, are unallowable.

(h) Patent infringement litigation.  Costs of legal, accounting, and consultant services, and related costs incurred in connection with patent infringement litigation, are unallowable unless otherwise provided for in the Federal award.

(i) Potentially unallowable costs.  Costs that may be unallowable under this section, including directly associated costs, must be segregated and accounted for separately. During the pendency of any proceeding covered by paragraphs (b) and (f) of this section, the Federal Government must generally withhold payment of such costs. However, if in its best interests, the Federal Government may provide for conditional payment upon provision of adequate security, or other adequate assurance, and agreement to repay all unallowable costs, plus interest, if the costs are subsequently determined to be unallowable.

§ 200.436 Depreciation.

(a) Depreciation is the method for allocating the cost of fixed assets to periods benefitting from asset use. The recipient or subrecipient may be compensated for the use of its buildings, capital improvements, equipment, and software projects capitalized in accordance with GAAP provided that they are needed and used in the recipient's or subrecipient's activities and correctly allocated to Federal awards. The compensation must be made by computing the proper depreciation.

(b) The allocation for depreciation must be made in accordance with Appendices III through IX of this part.

(c) Depreciation is computed applying the following rules. The computation of depreciation must be based on the acquisition cost of the assets involved. For an asset donated to the recipient or subrecipient by a third party, its fair market value at the time of the donation must be considered as the acquisition cost. Such assets may be depreciated or claimed as cost sharing but not both. When computing depreciation charges, the acquisition cost will exclude:

(1) The cost of land;

(2) Any portion of the cost of buildings and equipment borne by or donated by the Federal Government, irrespective of where the title was originally vested or is presently located;

(3) Any portion of the cost of buildings and equipment contributed by or for the recipient or subrecipient that is already claimed as cost sharing or where law or agreement prohibits recovery; and

(4) Any asset acquired solely for the performance of a non-Federal award.

(d) When computing depreciation charges, the following must be observed:

(1) The period of useful service or useful life established in each case for usable capital assets must take into consideration such factors as the type of construction, nature of the equipment, technological developments in the particular area, historical data, and the renewal and replacement policies followed for the individual items or classes of assets involved.

(2) The depreciation method used to charge the cost of an asset (or group of assets) to accounting periods must reflect the pattern of consumption of the asset during its useful life. In the absence of clear evidence indicating that the expected consumption of the asset will be significantly greater in the early portions than in the later portions of its useful life, the straight-line method must be presumed to be the appropriate method. Once used, depreciation methods may not be changed unless approved in advance by the cognizant agency for indirect costs. The depreciation methods used to calculate the depreciation amounts for indirect cost rate purposes must be the same methods used by the recipient or subrecipient for its financial statements.

(3) The entire building, including the shell and all components, may be treated as a single asset and depreciated over a single useful life. A building may also be divided into multiple components. Each component may be depreciated over its estimated useful life in this case. The building components must be grouped into three general components: building shell (including construction and design costs), building services systems (for example, elevators, HVAC, and plumbing system), and fixed equipment (for example, sterilizers, casework, fume hoods, cold rooms, and glassware/washers). A cognizant agency for indirect costs may authorize a recipient or subrecipient to use more than these three groupings in exceptional cases. When a recipient or subrecipient elects to depreciate its buildings by their components, the same depreciation method must be used for indirect and financial statements purposes, as described in paragraphs (d)(1) and (2).

(4) No depreciation may be allowed on assets that have outlived their depreciable lives.

(5) Where the depreciation method is introduced to replace the use allowance method, depreciation must be computed as if the asset had been depreciated over its entire life (meaning, from the date the asset was acquired and ready for use to the date of disposal or withdrawal from service). The total amount of use allowance and depreciation for an asset (including imputed depreciation applicable to periods before the conversion from the use allowance method and depreciation after the conversion) may not exceed the total acquisition cost of the asset.

(e) Adequate property records must support depreciation charges, and physical inventories must be taken at least once every two years to ensure that the assets exist and are usable, used, and needed. The recipient or subrecipient may use statistical sampling techniques when taking these inventories. In addition, the recipient or subrecipient must maintain adequate depreciation records showing the amount of depreciation.

§ 200.437 Employee health and welfare costs.

(a) Costs incurred in accordance with the recipient's or subrecipient's established written policies for improving working conditions, employer-employee relations, employee health, and employee performance are allowable.

(b) These costs must be equitably apportioned to all activities of the recipient or subrecipient. Income generated from these activities must be credited to the cost thereof unless such income has been irrevocably sent to employee welfare organizations.

(c) Losses resulting from operating food services are allowable only if the recipient's or subrecipient's objective is to operate food services on a break-even basis. Losses sustained because of operating objectives other than the above are allowable only when:

(1) The recipient or subrecipient can demonstrate unusual circumstances; and

(2) Approved by the cognizant agency for indirect costs.

§ 200.438 Entertainment and prizes.

(a) Entertainment costs.  Costs of entertainment, including amusement, diversion, and social activities and any associated costs (such as gifts), are unallowable unless they have a specific and direct programmatic purpose and are included in a Federal award.

(b) Prizes.  Costs of prizes or challenges are allowable if they have a specific and direct programmatic purpose and are included in the Federal award. Federal agencies should refer to OMB guidance in M-10-11 “Guidance on the Use of Challenges and Prizes to Promote Open Government,” issued March 8, 2010, or its successor.

§ 200.439 Equipment and other capital expenditures.

(a) See § 200.1 for the definitions of capital expenditures, equipment, special purpose equipment, general purpose equipment, acquisition cost, and capital assets.

(b) The following rules of allowability must apply to equipment and other capital expenditures:

(1) Capital expenditures for general purpose equipment, buildings, and land are allowable as direct costs, but only with the prior written approval of the Federal agency or pass-through entity.

(2) Capital expenditures for special purpose equipment are allowable as direct costs, provided that items with a unit cost of $10,000 or more have the prior written approval of the Federal agency or pass-through entity.

(3) Capital expenditures for improvements to land, buildings, or equipment that materially increase their value or useful life are allowable as a direct cost, but only with the prior written approval of the Federal agency or pass-through entity. See § 200.436 on the allowability of depreciation on buildings, capital improvements, and equipment. See § 200.465 on the allowability of real property and equipment rental costs.

(4) When approved as a direct cost in accordance with paragraphs (b)(1) through (3), capital expenditures must be charged in the period in which the expenditure is incurred or as otherwise determined appropriate and negotiated with the Federal agency.

(5) The recipient or subrecipient may claim the unamortized portion of any equipment written off as a result of a change in capitalization levels by continuing to claim the otherwise allowable depreciation on the equipment or by amortizing the amount to be written off over a period of years negotiated with the cognizant agency for indirect cost.

(6) Cost of equipment disposal. If the Federal agency instructs the recipient or subrecipient to otherwise dispose of or transfer the equipment, the costs of disposal or transfer are allowable.

(7) Equipment and other capital expenditures are unallowable as indirect costs. See § 200.436.

§ 200.440 Exchange rates.

(a) Cost increases for fluctuations in exchange rates are allowable costs subject to the availability of funding. Prior approval of exchange rate fluctuations is required only when the change results in the need for additional Federal funding, or the increased costs result in the need to significantly reduce the scope of the project. Before providing approval, the Federal agency must ensure that adequate funds are available to cover currency fluctuations in order to avoid a violation of the Antideficiency Act.

(b) The recipient or subrecipient is required to make reviews of local currency gains to determine the need for additional Federal funding before the expiration date of the Federal award. Subsequent adjustments for currency increases may be allowable only when the recipient or subrecipient provides the Federal agency with adequate source documentation from a commonly used source in effect at the time the expense was made, and to the extent that sufficient Federal funds are available.

§ 200.441 Fines, penalties, damages and other settlements.

Costs resulting from recipient or subrecipient violations of, alleged violations of, or failure to comply with, Federal, State, local, tribal, or foreign laws and regulations are unallowable, except when incurred as a result of compliance with specific provisions of the Federal award, or with the prior written approval of the Federal agency. See § 200.435.

§ 200.442 Fundraising and investment management costs.

(a) Costs of organized fundraising, including financial campaigns, endowment drives, solicitation of gifts and bequests, and similar expenses incurred to raise capital or obtain contributions, are unallowable. Fundraising costs for meeting the Federal program objectives are allowable with the prior written approval of the Federal agency.

(b) Costs of investment counsel and staff and similar expenses incurred to enhance income from investments are unallowable except when associated with investments covering pension, self-insurance, or other funds, which include Federal participation allowed by this part.

(c) Costs related to the physical custody and control of monies and securities are allowable.

(d) Both allowable and unallowable fundraising and investment activities must be allocated an appropriate share of indirect costs in accordance with § 200.413.

§ 200.443 Gains and losses on the disposition of depreciable assets.

(a) The recipient or subrecipient must include gains and losses on the sale, retirement, or other disposition of depreciable property in the year they occur as credits or charges to the asset cost grouping(s) of the property. The amount of the gain or loss is the difference between the amount realized on the property and the undepreciated basis of the property.

(b) Gains and losses from the disposition of depreciable property must not be recognized as a separate credit or charge under the following conditions:

(1) The gain or loss is processed through a depreciation account and is reflected in the depreciation allowable under §§ 200.436 and 200.439.

(2) The property is given in exchange as part of the purchase price of a similar item, and the gain or loss is taken into account in determining the depreciation cost basis of the new item.

(3) A loss results from failing to maintain proper insurance, except as provided in § 200.447.

(4) Compensation for the use of the property was provided through use allowances instead of depreciation.

(5) Gains and losses arising from extraordinary or bulk sales, retirements, or other dispositions must be considered on a case-by-case basis.

(c) Gains or losses of any nature arising from the sale or exchange of property other than the property covered in paragraph (a) of this section must be excluded in computing Federal award costs.

(d) When assets acquired with Federal funds, in part or wholly, are disposed of, the distribution of the proceeds must be made in accordance with §§ 200.310 through 200.316.

§ 200.444 General costs of government.

(a) For states, local governments, and Indian Tribes, the general costs of government are unallowable except as provided in § 200.475. Unallowable costs include:

(1) Salaries and expenses of the Office of the Governor of a State or the chief executive of a local government or the chief executive of an Indian Tribe;

(2) Salaries and other expenses of a State legislature, tribal council, or similar local governmental body, such as a county supervisor, city council, or school board, whether incurred for purposes of legislation or executive direction;

(3) Costs of the judicial branch of a government;

(4) Costs of prosecutorial activities unless treated as a direct cost to a specific program if authorized by statute or regulation. However, this does not preclude the allowability of other legal activities of the Attorney General as described in § 200.435; and

(5) Costs of other general types of government services normally provided to the general public, such as fire and police, unless provided as a direct cost under a program statute or regulation.

(b) Indian Tribes and Councils of Governments (COGs) (see definition for Local government in § 200.1) may include up to 50 percent of salaries and expenses directly attributable to managing and operating Federal programs by the chief executive and their staff in the indirect cost calculation without documentation.

§ 200.445 Goods or services for personal use.

(a) Costs of goods or services for the personal use of the recipient's or subrecipient's employees are unallowable regardless of whether the cost is reported as taxable income to the employees.

(b) Housing costs (for example, depreciation, maintenance, utilities, furnishings, rent), housing allowances, and personal living expenses for the recipient's or subrecipient's employees are only allowable as direct costs and must be approved in advance by the Federal agency.

§ 200.446 Idle facilities and idle capacity.

(a) Definitions for the purpose of this section:

(1) Facilities means land and buildings or any portion thereof, equipment individually or collectively, or any other tangible capital asset, wherever located, and whether owned or leased by the recipient or subrecipient.

(2) Idle facilities mean completely unused facilities that exceed the recipient's or subrecipient's current needs.

(3) Idle capacity means the unused capacity of partially used facilities. It is the difference between:

(i) That which a facility could achieve under 100 percent operating time on a one-shift basis less operating interruptions resulting from time lost for repairs, setups, unsatisfactory materials, and other normal delays; and

(ii) The extent to which the facility was actually used to meet demands during the accounting period. A multi-shift basis should be used if it can be shown that this amount of usage would normally be expected for the type of facility involved.

(4) Cost of idle facilities or idle capacity means maintenance, repair, housing, rent, and other related costs (for example, insurance, interest, and depreciation). These costs could include the costs of idle public safety emergency facilities, telecommunications, or information technology system capacity that is built to withstand major fluctuations in load (for example, consolidated data centers).

(b) The costs of idle facilities are unallowable except to the extent that:

(1) They are necessary to meet workload requirements which may fluctuate, and are allocated appropriately to all benefiting programs; or

(2) Although not necessary to meet fluctuations in workload, they were necessary when acquired and are now idle because of changes in program requirements, efforts to achieve more economical operations, reorganization, termination, or other causes which could not have been reasonably foreseen. Under this exception, costs of idle facilities are allowable for a reasonable period, ordinarily not to exceed one year, depending on the initiative taken to use, lease, or dispose of such facilities.

(c) The costs of idle capacity are normal costs of doing business and are a factor in the normal fluctuations of usage or indirect cost rates from period to period. These costs are allowable, provided that the capacity is reasonably anticipated to be necessary to carry out the purpose of the Federal award or was originally reasonable and is not subject to reduction or elimination by use on other Federal awards, subletting, renting, or sale, in accordance with sound business, economic, or security practices. Widespread idle capacity throughout an entire facility or among a group of assets having substantially the same function may be considered idle facilities.

§ 200.447 Insurance and indemnification.

(a) Costs of insurance required or approved and maintained by the terms and conditions of the Federal award are allowable.

(b) Costs of other insurance in connection with the general conduct of activities are allowable subject to the following limitations:

(1) The types, extent, and cost of coverage are in accordance with the recipient's or subrecipient's established written policy and sound business practices.

(2) Costs of insurance or contributions to any reserve covering the risk of loss of, or damage to, Federal Government property are unallowable except to the extent that the Federal agency has approved the costs.

(3) Costs allowed for business interruption or other similar insurance must exclude coverage of management fees.

(4) Insurance costs on the lives of trustees, officers, or other employees holding positions of similar responsibilities are allowable only when the insurance represents additional compensation (see § 200.431). This insurance is unallowable when the recipient or subrecipient is identified as the beneficiary.

(5) Insurance costs to correct defects in the recipient's or subrecipient's materials or workmanship are unallowable.

(6) Medical liability (malpractice) insurance is an allowable cost of a Federal research program only when the program involves human subjects or training of participants in research techniques. Medical liability insurance costs must be treated as a direct cost and assigned to individual projects based on how the insurer allocates the risk to the population covered by the insurance.

(c) Actual losses which could have been covered by permissible insurance (through a self-insurance program or otherwise) are unallowable unless expressly authorized in the Federal award. However, costs incurred because of losses not covered under nominal deductible insurance coverage provided in keeping with sound management practice, and minor losses not covered by insurance, such as spoilage, breakage, and disappearance of small hand tools, which occur in the ordinary course of operations, are allowable.

(d) Contributions to a reserve for a self-insurance program, including workers' compensation, unemployment compensation, and severance pay, are allowable subject to the following requirements:

(1) The type, extent, and cost of coverage and the rates and premiums would have been allowed had insurance (including reinsurance) been purchased to cover the risks. However, a provision for known or reasonably estimated self-insured liabilities, which do not become payable for more than one year after the provision is made, must not exceed the discounted present value of the liability. The rate used for discounting the liability must be determined by considering factors such as the recipient's or subrecipient's settlement rate for those liabilities and its investment rate of return.

(2) Earnings or investment income on reserves must be credited to those reserves.

(3) (i) Contributions to reserves must be based on sound actuarial principles using historical experience and reasonable assumptions. Reserve levels must be analyzed and updated at least biennially for each major risk being insured and take into account any reinsurance, coinsurance, and other relevant factors or information. Reserve levels related to employee-related coverages must normally be limited to the value of claims:

(A) Submitted and adjudicated but not paid;

(B) Submitted but not adjudicated; and

(C) Incurred but not submitted.

(ii) Reserve exceeding the levels described in paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section must be identified and justified in the cost allocation plan or indirect cost rate proposal.

(4) Accounting records, actuarial studies, and cost allocations (or billings) must recognize any significant differences due to the types of insured risk and losses generated by the various insured activities or agencies of the recipient or subrecipient. If individual departments or agencies of the recipient or subrecipient experience significantly different levels of claims for a particular risk, those differences must be recognized by using separate allocations or other techniques resulting in an equitable allocation.

(5) Whenever funds are transferred from a self-insurance reserve to other accounts (for example, general fund or unrestricted account), refunds must be made to the Federal Government for its share of funds transferred, including earned or imputed interest from the date of transfer and debt interest, if applicable, chargeable in accordance with the claims collection regulations of the cognizant agency for indirect cost.

(e) Insurance refunds must be credited against insurance costs in the year the refund is received.

(f) Indemnification includes securing the recipient or subrecipient against liabilities to third persons and other losses not compensated by insurance or otherwise. The Federal Government is obligated to indemnify the recipient or subrecipient only to the extent expressly provided for in the Federal award, except as provided in paragraph (c).

§ 200.448 Intellectual property.

(a) Patent and copyright costs. (1) The following costs related to securing patents and copyrights are allowable:

(i) Costs of preparing disclosures, reports, and other documents required by the Federal award and of searching the art to the extent necessary to make such disclosures;

(ii) Costs of preparing documents and any other patent costs in connection with the filing and prosecution of a United States patent application where the Federal Government requires that a title or a royalty-free license be conveyed to the Federal Government; and

(iii) General counseling services relating to patent and copyright matters, such as advice on patent and copyright laws, regulations, clauses, and employee intellectual property agreements (See § 200.459).

(2) The following costs related to securing patents and copyrights are unallowable:

(i) Costs of preparing disclosures, reports, and other documents and of searching the art to make disclosures not required by the Federal award;

(ii) Costs in connection with filing and prosecuting any foreign patent application, or any United States patent application, where the Federal award does not require conveying title or a royalty-free license to the Federal Government.

(b) Royalties and other costs for the use of patents and copyrights. (1) Royalties on a patent or copyright or amortization of the cost of acquiring by purchase a copyright, patent, or rights thereto, necessary for the proper performance of the Federal award are allowable unless:

(i) The Federal Government already has a license or the right to free use of the patent or copyright.

(ii) The patent or copyright has been adjudicated to be invalid or administratively determined to be invalid.

(iii) The patent or copyright is considered to be unenforceable.

(iv) The patent or copyright is expired.

(2) Special care should be exercised in determining reasonableness when the royalties may have been obtained as a result of less-than-arm's-length bargaining, such as:

(i) Royalties paid to persons, including corporations, affiliated with the recipient or subrecipient.

(ii) Royalties paid to unaffiliated parties, including corporations, under an agreement entered into in contemplation that a Federal award would be made.

(iii) Royalties paid under an agreement entered into after a Federal award is made to a recipient or subrecipient.

(3) In any case involving a patent or copyright formerly owned by the recipient or subrecipient, the amount of royalty allowed must not exceed the cost which would have been allowed had the recipient or subrecipient retained ownership.

§ 200.449 Interest.

(a) General.  Costs incurred for interest on borrowed capital, temporary use of endowment funds, or the use of the recipient's or subrecipient's own funds are unallowable. Financing costs (including interest) to acquire, construct, or replace capital assets are allowable, subject to the requirements of this section.

(b) Capital assets. (1) Capital assets is defined in § 200.1. An asset cost includes (as applicable) acquisition costs, construction costs, and other costs capitalized in accordance with GAAP.

(2) For recipient or subrecipient fiscal years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, intangible assets include patents and computer software. For software development projects, only interest attributable to the portion of the project costs capitalized in accordance with GAAP is allowable.

(c) Requirements for all recipients and subrecipients. (1) The recipient or subrecipient uses the capital assets in support of Federal awards;

(2) The allowable asset costs to acquire facilities and equipment are limited to a fair market value available to the recipient or subrecipient from an unrelated (arm's length) third party.

(3) The recipient or subrecipient obtains the financing via an arm's-length transaction (meaning, a transaction with an unrelated third party); or claims reimbursement of actual interest cost at a rate available via such a transaction.

(4) The recipient or subrecipient limits claims for Federal reimbursement of interest costs to the least expensive alternative. For example, a lease contract that transfers ownership by the end of the contract may be determined less costly than purchasing through other types of debt financing, in which case reimbursement must be limited to the amount of interest determined if leasing had been used.

(5) The recipient or subrecipient expenses or capitalizes allowable interest cost in accordance with GAAP.

(6) Earnings generated by the investment of borrowed funds pending their disbursement for the asset costs are used to offset the current period's allowable interest cost, whether that cost is expensed or capitalized. Earnings subject to being reported to the Federal Internal Revenue Service under arbitrage requirements are excludable.

(7) The following conditions must apply to debt arrangements over $1 million to purchase or construct facilities unless the recipient or subrecipient makes an initial equity contribution to the purchase of 25 percent or more. For this purpose, “initial equity contribution” means the amount or value of contributions made by the recipient or subrecipient for the acquisition of facilities prior to occupancy.

(i) The recipient or subrecipient must reduce claims for reimbursement of interest cost by an amount equal to imputed interest earnings on excess cash flow attributable to the portion of the facility used for Federal awards.

(ii) The recipient or subrecipient must impute interest on excess cash flow as follows:

(A) Annually, the recipient or subrecipient must prepare a cumulative (from the project's inception) report of monthly cash inflows and outflows, regardless of the funding source. For this purpose, inflows consist of Federal reimbursement for depreciation, amortization of capitalized construction interest, and annual interest cost. Outflows consist of initial equity contributions, debt principal payments (less the pro-rata share attributable to the cost of land), and interest payments.

(B) To compute monthly cash inflows and outflows, the recipient or subrecipient must divide the above-mentioned annual amounts by the months in the year (usually 12) that the building is in service.

(C) For any month in which cumulative cash inflows exceed cumulative outflows, interest must be calculated on the excess inflows for that month and be treated as a reduction to allowable interest cost. The interest rate to be used must be the three-month Treasury bill closing rate as of the last business day of that month.

(8) Interest attributable to a fully depreciated asset is unallowable.

(d) Additional requirements for states, local governments and Indian Tribes.  For interest costs to be allowable for states, local governments, and Indian Tribes, the recipient or subrecipient must have incurred the interest costs for buildings after October 1, 1980, or after September 1, 1995, for land and equipment.

(1) The requirement to offset the interest earned on borrowed funds against allowable interest cost (paragraph (c)(5) of this section) also applies to earnings on debt service reserve funds.

(2) The recipient or subrecipient must negotiate the amount of allowable interest cost related to the acquisition of facilities with asset costs of $1 million or more, as described in paragraph (c)(7) of this section. For this purpose, a recipient or subrecipient must consider only cash inflows and outflows attributable to that portion of the real property used for Federal awards.

(e) Additional requirements for IHEs.  For interest costs to be allowable, the IHE must have incurred the interest costs after July 1, 1982, in connection with acquisitions of capital assets that occurred after that date.

(f) Additional requirements for nonprofit organizations.  For interest costs to be allowable, the nonprofit organization must have incurred the interest costs after September 29, 1995, in connection with acquisitions of capital assets that occurred after that date.

(g) Requirements for nonprofit organizations subject to full coverage under CAS.  The interest allowability provisions of this section do not apply to a nonprofit organization subject to “full coverage” under the Cost Accounting Standards (CAS), as defined at 48 CFR 9903.201-2(a). The nonprofit organization's Federal awards are instead subject to CAS 414 (48 CFR 9904.414), “Cost of Money as an Element of the Cost of Facilities Capital,” and CAS 417 (48 CFR 9904.417), “Cost of Money as an Element of the Cost of Capital Assets Under Construction.”

§ 200.450 Lobbying.

(a) Lobbying costs associated with obtaining Federal assistance awards.  The costs of certain influencing activities associated with obtaining grants, cooperative agreements, contracts, or loans are unallowable. Lobbying with respect to certain grants, cooperative agreements, contracts, and loans is governed by relevant statutes, including the provisions of 31 U.S.C. 1352, as well as the common rule, “New Restrictions on Lobbying,” published on February 26, 1990, including definitions, and the Office of Management and Budget “Government-wide Guidance for New Restrictions on Lobbying” and notices published on December 20, 1989, June 15, 1990, January 15, 1992, and January 19, 1996.

(b) Executive lobbying costs.  Costs incurred in attempting to improperly influence, either directly or indirectly, an employee or officer of the executive branch of the Federal Government to give consideration or to act regarding a Federal award or a regulatory matter are unallowable. Improper influence means any influence that induces or tends to induce a Federal employee or officer to give consideration or to act regarding a Federal award or regulatory matter on any basis other than the merit.

(c) Restrictions on nonprofit organizations and IHEs.  In addition, the following restrictions apply to nonprofit organizations and IHEs:

(1) Costs associated with the following activities are unallowable:

(i) Attempts to influence the outcomes of any Federal, State, or local election, referendum, initiative, or similar procedure through in-kind or cash contributions, endorsements, publicity, or similar activity;

(ii) Establishing, administering, contributing to, or paying the expenses of a political party, campaign, political action committee, or other organization established to influence the outcomes of elections in the United States;

(iii) Any attempt to influence:

(A) The introduction of Federal or State legislation;

(B) The enactment or modification of any pending Federal or State legislation through communication with any member or employee of the Congress or State legislature (including efforts to influence State or local officials to engage in similar lobbying activity);

(C) The enactment or modification of any pending Federal or State legislation by preparing, distributing, or using publicity or propaganda or by urging members of the general public, or any segment thereof, to contribute to or participate in any mass demonstration, march, rally, fundraising drive, lobbying campaign or letter writing or telephone campaign; or

(D) Any government official or employee in connection with a decision to sign or veto enrolled legislation;

(iv) Legislative liaison activities, including attendance at legislative sessions or committee hearings, gathering information regarding legislation, and analyzing the effect of legislation, when such activities are carried on in support of or in knowing preparation for an effort to engage in unallowable lobbying.

(2) The following activities are excepted from the coverage of paragraph (c)(1) of this section:

(i) Technical and factual presentations on topics directly related to the performance of a grant, contract, or other agreement (through hearing testimony, statements, or letters to the Congress or a State legislature, or subdivision, member, or cognizant staff member thereof), in response to a documented request (including a Congressional Record notice requesting testimony or statements for the record at a regularly scheduled hearing) made by the recipient's or subrecipient's member of congress, legislative body, subdivision, or a cognizant staff member thereof, provided such information is readily obtainable and can be readily put in deliverable form, and further provided that costs under this section for travel, lodging or meals are unallowable unless incurred to offer testimony at a regularly scheduled Congressional hearing pursuant to a written request for such presentation made by the Chairman or Ranking Minority Member of the Committee or Subcommittee conducting such hearings;

(ii) Any lobbying made unallowable by paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of this section to influence State legislation to directly reduce the cost, or to avoid material impairment of the recipient's or subrecipient's authority to perform the grant, contract, or other agreement;

(iii) Any activity specifically authorized by statute to be undertaken with funds from the Federal award; or

(iv) Any activity excepted from the definitions of “lobbying” or “influencing legislation” by the Internal Revenue Code provisions that require nonprofit organizations to limit their participation in direct and “grass roots” lobbying activities to retain their charitable deduction status and avoid punitive excise taxes, 26 U.S.C. (I.R.C.) 501(c)(3), 501(h), 4911(a), including:

(A) Nonpartisan analysis, study, or research reports;

(B) Examinations and discussions of broad social, economic, and similar problems; and

(C) Information provided upon request by a legislator for technical advice and assistance, as defined by I.R.C. 4911(d)(2) and 26 CFR 56.4911-2(c)(1) through (c)(3).

(3) When a recipient or subrecipient seeks reimbursement for indirect costs, total lobbying costs must be identified separately in the indirect cost rate proposal and thereafter be treated as other unallowable activity costs in accordance with § 200.413.

(4) The recipient or subrecipient must submit a certification that the requirements and standards of this section have been complied with as part of its annual indirect cost rate proposal. (See § 200.415.)

(5) (i) Time logs, calendars, or similar records are not required to be created for purposes of complying with the record-keeping requirements in § 200.302 with respect to lobbying costs during a particular calendar month when:

(A) The employee engages in lobbying (as defined in paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) of this section) for 25 percent or less of the employee's compensated hours of employment during that calendar month; and

(B) Within the preceding five-year period, the recipient or subrecipient has not materially misstated allowable or unallowable costs of any nature, including legislative lobbying costs.

(ii) When conditions in paragraph (c)(5)(i)(A) and (B) of this section are met, recipients and subrecipients are not required to establish records to support the allowability of claimed costs in addition to records already required or maintained. Also, when conditions in paragraphs (c)(5)(i)(A) and (B) of this section are met, the absence of time logs, calendars, or similar records will not serve as a basis for disallowing costs by contesting estimates of lobbying time spent by employees during a calendar month.

(iii) In consultation with OMB, the Federal agency must establish procedures for resolving, in advance, any significant questions or disagreements concerning the interpretation or application of this section. Any such advance resolutions must be binding in any subsequent settlements, audits, or investigations with respect to that grant or contract for purposes of interpretation of this part, provided, however, that this must not be construed to prevent a contractor or recipient or subrecipient from contesting the lawfulness of such a determination.

§ 200.451 Losses on other awards or contracts.

Any excess costs over income under any other award or contract of any nature is unallowable. This includes, but is not limited to, the recipient's or subrecipient's contributed portion by reason of cost sharing agreements or any under-recoveries through negotiation of flat amounts for indirect costs. Also, any excess of costs over authorized funding levels transferred from any award or contract to another is unallowable. All losses are not allowable indirect costs and must be included in the appropriate indirect cost rate base for allocating indirect costs.

§ 200.452 Maintenance and repair costs.

Costs incurred for utilities, insurance, security, necessary maintenance, janitorial services, repair, or upkeep of buildings and equipment (including Federal property unless otherwise provided for) which neither add to the permanent value of the property nor appreciably prolong its intended life, but keep it in an efficient operating condition, are allowable. Costs incurred for improvements that add to the permanent value of the buildings and equipment or appreciably prolong their intended life must be treated as capital expenditures (see § 200.439). These costs are only allowable to the extent not paid through rental or other agreements.

§ 200.453 Materials and supplies costs, including costs of computing devices.

(a) Costs incurred for materials, supplies, and fabricated parts necessary for the performance of a Federal award are allowable.

(b) Purchased materials and supplies must be charged at their actual prices, net of applicable credits. Withdrawals from general stores or stockrooms must be charged at their actual net cost under any recognized method of pricing inventory withdrawals, consistently applied. Incoming transportation charges are an allowable part of materials and supplies costs.

(c) Materials and supplies used for the performance of a Federal award may be charged as direct costs. Charging computing devices as direct costs is allowable for devices that are essential and allocable, but not solely dedicated, to the performance of a Federal award.

(d) Where Federally-donated or furnished materials are used in performing the Federal award, the materials will be used without charge.

§ 200.454 Memberships, subscriptions, and professional activity costs.

(a) Costs of the recipient's or subrecipient's membership in business, technical, and professional organizations are allowable.

(b) Costs of the recipient's or subrecipient's subscriptions to business, professional, and technical periodicals are allowable.

(c) Costs of membership in any civic or community organization are allowable.

(d) Costs of membership in any country club or social or dining club or organization are unallowable.

(e) Costs of membership in organizations whose primary purpose is lobbying are unallowable. See § 200.450.

§ 200.455 Organization costs.

(a) Costs such as incorporation fees, brokers' fees, fees to promoters, organizers or management consultants, attorneys, accountants, or investment counselors, whether or not employees of the recipient or subrecipient in connection with the establishment or reorganization of an organization, are unallowable except with prior approval of the Federal agency.

(b) The costs of any of the following activities are unallowable: activities undertaken to persuade employees of the recipient or subrecipient, or any other entity, to exercise or not to exercise, or concerning the manner of exercising, the right to organize and bargain collectively through representatives of the employees' own choosing.

(c) The costs related to data and evaluation are allowable. Data costs include (but are not limited to) the expenditures needed to gather, store, track, manage, analyze, disaggregate, secure, share, publish, or otherwise use data to administer or improve the program, such as data systems, personnel, data dashboards, cybersecurity, and related items. Data costs may also include direct or indirect costs associated with building integrated data systems—data systems that link individual-level data from multiple State and local government agencies for purposes of management, research, and evaluation. Evaluation costs include (but are not limited to) evidence reviews, evaluation planning and feasibility assessment, conducting evaluations, sharing evaluation results, and other personnel or materials costs related to the effective building and use of evidence and evaluation for program design, administration, or improvement.

§ 200.456 Participant support costs.

Participant support costs are allowable (see § 200.1). The classification of items as participant support costs must be documented in the recipient's or subrecipient's written policies and procedures and treated consistently across all Federal awards.

§ 200.457 Plant and security costs.

Necessary and reasonable expenses incurred for the protection and security of facilities, personnel, and work products are allowable. Such costs include, but are not limited to, wages and uniforms of personnel engaged in security activities; equipment; barriers; protective (non-military) gear, devices, and equipment; contractual security services; and consultants. Capital expenditures for plant security purposes are subject to § 200.439.

§ 200.458 Pre-award costs.

Pre-award costs are those incurred before the start date of the Federal award or subaward directly pursuant to the negotiation and in anticipation of the Federal award where such costs are necessary for efficient and timely performance of the scope of work. These costs are allowable only to the extent that they would have been allowed if incurred after the start date of the Federal award and only with the written approval of the Federal agency. If approved, these costs must be charged to the initial budget period of the Federal award unless otherwise specified by the Federal agency or pass-through entity.

§ 200.459 Professional service costs.

(a) Costs of professional and consultant services rendered by persons who are members of a particular profession or possess a special skill and who are not officers or employees of the recipient or subrecipient are allowable, subject to paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section when reasonable in relation to the services rendered and when not contingent upon recovery of the costs from the Federal Government. In addition, legal and related services are limited under § 200.435.

(b) In determining the allowability of costs in a particular case, no single factor or any combination of factors is necessarily determinative. However, the following factors are relevant:

(1) The nature and scope of the service rendered in relation to the service required.

(2) The necessity of contracting for the service, considering the recipient's or subrecipient's capability in the particular area.

(3) The past pattern of such costs, particularly in the years prior to receiving a Federal award(s).

(4) The impact of Federal awards on the recipient's or subrecipient's business (meaning, what new problems have arisen).

(5) Whether the proportion of Federal work to the recipient's or subrecipient's total business influences the recipient or subrecipient in favor of incurring the cost, particularly where the services rendered are not of a continuing nature and have little relationship to work under Federal awards.

(6) Whether the service can be performed more economically by direct employment rather than contracting.

(7) The qualifications of the individual or entity providing the service and the customary fees charged, especially on non-federally funded activities.

(8) Adequacy of the contractual agreement for the service (for example, description of the service, estimate of the time required, rate of compensation, and termination provisions).

(c) To be allowable, retainer fees must be supported by evidence of bona fide services available or rendered in addition to the factors in paragraph (b) of this section.

§ 200.460 Proposal costs.

Proposal costs are the costs of preparing bids, proposals, or applications on potential Federal and non-Federal awards or projects, including developing data necessary to support the recipient's or subrecipient's bids or proposals. Proposal costs of the current accounting period of both successful and unsuccessful bids and proposals normally should be treated as indirect costs and allocated to all current activities of the recipient or subrecipient. No proposal costs of past accounting periods may be allocated to the current period.

§ 200.461 Publication and printing costs.

(a) Publication costs for electronic and print media, including distribution, promotion, and general handling, are allowable. These costs should be allocated as indirect costs to all benefiting activities of the recipient or subrecipient if they are not identifiable with a particular cost objective.

(b) Page charges, article processing charges (APCs), or similar fees such as open access fees for professional journal publications and other peer-reviewed publications resulting from a Federal award are allowable where:

(1) The publications report work supported by the Federal Government; and

(2) The charges are levied impartially on all items published by the journal, whether or not under a Federal award.

(3) The recipient or subrecipient may charge the Federal award during closeout for the costs of publication or sharing of research results if the costs were not incurred during the period of performance of the Federal award. These costs must be charged to the final budget period of the award unless otherwise specified by the Federal agency.

§ 200.462 Rearrangement and reconversion costs.

(a) Costs incurred for ordinary and normal rearrangement and alteration of facilities are allowable as indirect costs. Special arrangements and alterations are allowable as a direct cost if the costs are incurred specifically for a Federal award and with the prior approval of the Federal agency or pass-through entity.

(b) Costs incurred in restoring or rehabilitating the recipient's or subrecipient's facilities to approximately the same condition existing immediately before the commencement of a Federal award(s), less costs related to normal wear and tear, are allowable.

§ 200.463 Recruiting costs.

(a) Subject to paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, and provided that the size of the staff recruited and maintained is in keeping with workload requirements, costs of “help wanted” advertising, operating costs of an employment office necessary to secure and maintain adequate staff, costs of operating an aptitude and educational testing program, travel costs of employees while engaged in recruiting personnel, travel costs of applicants for interviews for prospective employment, and relocation costs incurred incident to recruitment of new employees, are allowable to the extent that such costs are incurred pursuant to the recipient's or subrecipient's standard recruitment program. When the recipient or subrecipient uses employment agencies, costs not in excess of standard commercial rates for such services are allowable.

(b) Special emoluments, fringe benefits, and salary allowances incurred to attract professional personnel that do not meet the test of reasonableness or do not conform with the established practices of the recipient or subrecipient, are unallowable.

(c) If relocation costs incurred incident to recruitment of a new employee have been funded in whole or in part by a Federal award, and the newly hired employee resigns for reasons within the employee's control within 12 months after hire, the recipient or subrecipient must refund or credit the Federal Government for its share of those relocation costs. See § 200.464.

(d) Short-term visas (as opposed to longer-term immigration visas) are generally an allowable cost and they may be proposed as a direct cost because they are issued for a specific period and purpose and can be clearly identified as directly connected to work performed on a Federal award. For these costs to be directly charged to a Federal award, they must:

(1) Be critical and necessary for the conduct of the project;

(2) Be allowable under the applicable cost principles;

(3) Be consistent with the recipient's or subrecipient's cost accounting practices and established written policy; and

(4) Meet the definition of “direct cost” as described in the applicable cost principles.

§ 200.464 Relocation costs of employees.

(a) Relocation costs are costs incident to the permanent change of duty assignment (for an indefinite period or a stated period of not less than 12 months) of an existing employee or upon recruitment of a new employee. Relocation costs are allowable, subject to the limitations described in paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this section, provided that:

(1) The move is for the benefit of the employer.

(2) Reimbursement to the employee is in accordance with an established written policy consistently followed by the employer.

(3) The reimbursement does not exceed the employee's actual (or reasonably estimated) expenses.

(b) Allowable relocation costs for current employees are limited to the following:

(1) The costs of transportation of the employee, members of their immediate family and their household, and personal effects to the new location.

(2) The costs of finding a new home, such as advance trips by employees and spouses to locate living quarters and temporary lodging during the transition period, up to a maximum period of 30 calendar days.

(3) Closing costs, such as brokerage, legal, and appraisal fees, incidental to the disposition of the employee's former home. These costs, together with those described in paragraph (b)(4) of this section, are limited to eight percent of the sales price of the employee's former home.

(4) The continuing costs of ownership (for up to six months) of the vacant former home after the settlement or lease date of the employee's new permanent home, such as maintenance of buildings and grounds (exclusive of fixing-up expenses), utilities, taxes, and property insurance.

(5) Other necessary and reasonable expenses normally incident to relocation, such as canceling an unexpired lease, transportation of personal property, and purchasing insurance against loss of or damages to personal property. The cost of canceling an unexpired lease is limited to three times the monthly rental.

(c) Allowable relocation costs for new employees are limited to those described in paragraphs (b)(1) and (2) of this section. If relocation costs incurred incident to the recruitment of a new employee have been funded in whole or in part by a Federal award, and the newly hired employee resigns for reasons within the employee's control within 12 months after hire, the recipient or subrecipient must refund or credit the Federal Government for its share of the cost. If a new employee is relocating to an overseas location and dependents are not permitted for any reason, and the costs do not include transporting household goods, the costs must be considered travel costs in accordance with § 200.474, not relocation costs under this section.

(d) The following costs related to relocation are unallowable:

(1) Fees and other costs associated with acquiring a new home.

(2) A loss on the sale of a former home.

(3) Continuing mortgage principal and interest payments on a home being sold.

(4) Income taxes paid by an employee related to reimbursed relocation costs.

§ 200.465 Rental costs of real property and equipment.

(a) Subject to the limitations described in paragraphs (b) through (d) of this section, rental costs are allowable to the extent that the rates are reasonable in light of such factors as costs of comparable rental properties; market conditions in the area; alternatives available; and the type, life expectancy, condition, and value of the property leased. Rental arrangements should be reviewed periodically to determine if circumstances have changed and if other options are available.

(b) Rental costs under “sale and lease back” arrangements are allowable only up to the amount that would have been allowed if the recipient or subrecipient had continued to own the property. This amount would include expenses such as depreciation, maintenance, taxes, and insurance.

(c) Rental costs under “less-than-arm's-length” leases are allowable only up to the amount described in paragraph (b) of this section. For this purpose, a less-than-arm's-length lease is one under which one party to the lease agreement can control or substantially influence the actions of the other. Such leases include, but are not limited to, those between:

(1) Divisions of the recipient or subrecipient;

(2) The recipient or subrecipient and another entity under common control through common officers, directors, or members; and

(3) The recipient or subrecipient and a director, trustee, officer, or key employee of the recipient or subrecipient or an immediate family member, either directly or through corporations, trusts, or similar arrangements in which they hold a controlling interest. For example, the recipient or subrecipient may establish a separate corporation to own property and lease it back to the recipient or subrecipient.

(4) Family members include one party with any of the following relationships to another party:

(i) Spouse and parents thereof;

(ii) Children and spouses thereof;

(iii) Parents and spouses thereof;

(iv) Siblings and spouses thereof;

(v) Grandparents and grandchildren and spouses thereof;

(vi) Domestic partner and parents thereof, including domestic partners of any individual in 2 through 5 of this definition; and

(vii) Any individual related by blood or affinity whose close association with the employee is the equivalent of a family relationship.

(d) Rental costs under leases which are required to be accounted for as a financed purchase under GASB standards or a finance lease under FASB standards are allowable only up to the amount (described in paragraph (b) of this section) that would have been allowed if the recipient or subrecipient had purchased the property on the date the lease agreement was executed. Interest costs related to these leases are allowable if they meet the criteria in § 200.449. Unallowable costs include costs that would not have been incurred if the recipient or subrecipient had purchased the property, such as amounts paid for profit, management fees, and taxes.

(e) Rental or lease payments are allowable under lease contracts where the recipient or subrecipient is required to recognize an intangible right-to-use lease asset under GASB standards or right-of-use operating lease asset under FASB standards for purposes of financial reporting in accordance with GAAP.

(f) The rental of any property owned by any individuals or entities affiliated with the recipient or subrecipient, including commercial or residential real estate, for purposes such as the home office is unallowable.

§ 200.466 Scholarships, student aid costs, and tuition remission.

(a) Costs of scholarships, fellowships, and student aid programs at IHEs are allowable only when the purpose of the Federal award is to provide training to participants, and the Federal agency approves the cost.

(b) Tuition remission and other forms of compensation paid as, or instead of, wages to students performing necessary work are allowable provided that:

(1) The individual is conducting activities necessary to the Federal award;

(2) Tuition remission and other support are provided in accordance with the established written policy of the IHE and consistently provided in a like manner to students in return for similar activities conducted under Federal awards as well as other activities; and

(3) The student is enrolled in an advanced degree program at the IHE or an affiliated institution during the academic period and the student's activities under the Federal award are related to their degree program;

(4) The tuition or other payments are reasonable compensation for the work performed and are conditioned explicitly upon the performance of necessary work; and

(5) The IHE compensates students under Federal awards as well as other activities in similar manners.

(c) Charges for tuition remission and other forms of compensation paid to students as, or instead of, salaries and wages are subject to the reporting requirements in § 200.430. The charges must be treated as a direct or indirect cost in accordance with the actual work performed. Tuition remission may be charged on an average rate basis. See § 200.431.

§ 200.467 Selling and marketing costs.

Costs of selling and marketing any products or services of the recipient or subrecipient are unallowable unless they are allowed under § 200.421 and are necessary to meet the requirements of the Federal award.

§ 200.468 Specialized service facilities.

(a) The costs of services provided by highly complex or specialized facilities operated by the recipient or subrecipient are allowable provided the charges for the services meet the conditions of either paragraph (b) or (c) of this section and take into account any items of income or Federal financing that qualify as applicable credits under § 200.406. These costs include charges for facilities such as computing facilities, wind tunnels, and reactors.

(b) The costs of such services, when material, must be charged directly to the applicable Federal awards based on actual usage of the services on the basis of a schedule of rates or established methodology that:

(1) Does not discriminate between activities under Federal awards and other activities of the recipient or subrecipient, including usage by the recipient or subrecipient for internal purposes; and

(2) Is designed to recover only the aggregate costs of the services. Each service's costs must normally consist of its direct costs and an allocable share of all indirect costs. Rates must be adjusted at least biennially and must consider any over or under-applied costs of the previous period(s).

(c) Where the costs incurred for a service are not material, they may be allocated as indirect costs.

(d) Under extraordinary circumstances, the cognizant agency for indirect costs and the recipient or subrecipient may negotiate and establish an alternative costing arrangement if it is in the Federal Government's best interest.

§ 200.469 Student activity costs.

Costs incurred for intramural activities, student publications, student clubs, and other student activities are unallowable unless expressly authorized in the Federal award.

§ 200.470 Taxes (including Value Added Tax).

(a) For States, local governments, and Indian Tribes. (1) Taxes that a governmental unit is legally required to pay are allowable, except for self-assessed taxes that disproportionately affect Federal programs or changes in tax policies that disproportionately affect Federal programs.

(2) Gasoline taxes, motor vehicle fees, and other taxes that are, in effect, user fees for benefits provided to the Federal Government are allowable.

(3) This provision does not restrict the authority of the Federal agency to identify taxes where Federal participation is inappropriate. The cognizant agency for indirect costs may accept a reasonable approximation in circumstances where determining the amount of unallowable taxes would require an excessive amount of effort.

(b) For nonprofit organizations and IHEs. (1) Taxes that the recipient or subrecipient is required to pay and which are paid or accrued in accordance with GAAP are generally allowable. These costs include payments made to local governments instead of taxes and that are commensurate with the local government services received. The following taxes are unallowable:

(i) Taxes for which exemptions are available to the recipient or subrecipient directly or which are available to the recipient or subrecipient based on an exemption afforded the Federal Government and, in the latter case, when the Federal agency makes available the necessary exemption certificates;

(ii) Special assessments on land which represent capital improvements; and

(iii) Federal income taxes.

(2) Any refund of taxes and interest thereon, which were allowed as Federal award costs, must be credited to the Federal Government as a cost reduction or cash refund, as appropriate. However, any interest paid or credited to a recipient or subrecipient incident to a refund of tax, interest, and penalty will be paid or credited to the Federal Government only to the extent that such interest accrued over the period during which the Federal Government has reimbursed the recipient or subrecipient for the taxes, interest, and penalties.

(c) Value Added Tax (VAT).  Foreign taxes charged for procurement transactions that a recipient or subrecipient is legally required to pay in a country are allowable. Foreign tax refunds or applicable credits under Federal awards refer to receipts or reduction of expenditures, which operate to offset or reduce expense items that are allocable to Federal awards as direct or indirect costs. To the extent that such credits accrued or received by the recipient or subrecipient relate to allowable cost, these costs must be credited to the Federal agency as a cost reduction or cash refunds, as appropriate. In cases where the costs are credited back to the Federal award, the recipient or subrecipient may reduce the Federal share of costs by the amount of the foreign tax reimbursement, or where Federal award has not expired, the Federal agency may allow the recipient or subrecipient to use the foreign government tax refund for approved activities under the Federal award.

§ 200.471 Telecommunication and video surveillance costs.

(a) Costs incurred for telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment such as phones, internet, video surveillance, and cloud servers are allowable except for the following circumstances:

(b) Obligating or expending covered telecommunications and video surveillance services or equipment or services as described in § 200.216 to:

(1) Procure or obtain, extend or renew a contract to procure or obtain;

(2) Enter into a contract (or extend or renew a contract) to procure; or

(3) Obtain the equipment, services, or systems.

§ 200.472 Termination and standard closeout costs.

(a) Termination Costs.  Termination of a Federal award generally gives rise to the incurrence of costs or the need for special treatment of costs, which would not have arisen had the Federal award not been terminated. Cost principles covering these items are set forth in this section. They must be used in conjunction with the other termination requirements of this part.

(1) The cost of items reasonably usable on the recipient's or subrecipient's other work is unallowable unless the recipient or subrecipient submits evidence that it would not retain such items without sustaining a loss. In deciding whether such items are reasonably usable on other work of the recipient or subrecipient, the Federal agency or pass-through entity should consider the recipient's or subrecipient's plans and orders for current and scheduled activity. Contemporaneous purchases of common items by the recipient or subrecipient must be considered evidence that the items are reasonably usable on the recipient's or subrecipient's other work. Any acceptance of common items as allocable to the terminated portion of the Federal award must be limited to the extent that the quantities of such items on hand, in transit, and on order do not exceed the reasonable quantitative requirements of other work.

(2) If the recipient or subrecipient cannot discontinue certain costs immediately after the effective termination date, despite making all reasonable efforts, then the costs are generally allowable within the limitations of this part. Any costs continuing after termination due to the negligent or willful failure of the recipient or subrecipient to immediately discontinue the costs are unallowable.

(3) Loss of useful value of special tooling, machinery, and equipment is generally allowable if:

(i) Such special tooling, special machinery, or equipment is not reasonably capable of use in the other work of the recipient or subrecipient;

(ii) The interest of the Federal Government is protected by transfer of title or by other means deemed appropriate by the Federal agency (see § 200.313 (d)); and

(iii) The loss of useful value for any one terminated Federal award is limited to the portion of the acquisition cost which bears the same ratio to the total acquisition cost as the terminated portion of the Federal award bears to the entire terminated Federal award and other Federal awards for which the special tooling, machinery, or equipment was acquired.

(4) If paragraph (a)(4)(i) and (ii) below are satisfied, rental costs under unexpired leases (less the residual value of such leases) are generally allowable where clearly shown to have been reasonably necessary for the performance of the terminated Federal award. These rental costs may include the cost of alterations of the leased property and the cost of reasonable restoration required by the lease, provided the alterations were necessary for the performance of the Federal award.

(i) The amount of claimed rental costs does not exceed the reasonable use value of the property leased for the period of the Federal award and a further period as may be reasonable; and

(ii) The recipient or subrecipient makes all reasonable efforts to terminate, assign, settle, or otherwise reduce the cost of the lease.

(5) The following settlement expenses are generally allowable.

(i) Accounting, legal, clerical, and similar costs that are reasonably necessary for:

(A) The preparation and presentation to the Federal agency or pass-through entity of settlement claims and supporting data with respect to the terminated portion of the Federal award, unless the termination is for cause (see §§ 200.339-200.343); and

(B) The termination and settlement of subawards.

(ii) Reasonable costs for the storage, transportation, protection, and disposition of property provided by the Federal Government or acquired or produced for the Federal award.

(6) Claims under subawards, including the allocable portion of claims common to the Federal award and other work of the recipient or subrecipient, are generally allowable. An appropriate share of the recipient's or subrecipient's indirect costs may be allocated to the amount of settlements with contractors and subrecipients, provided that the amount allocated is consistent with the requirements of § 200.414. These allocated indirect costs must exclude the same and similar costs claimed directly or indirectly as settlement expenses.

(b) Closeout Costs.  Administrative costs associated with the closeout activities of a Federal award are allowable. The recipient or subrecipient may charge the Federal award during the closeout for the necessary administrative costs of that Federal award (for example, salaries of personnel preparing final reports, publication and printing costs, costs associated with the disposition of equipment and property, and related indirect costs). These costs may be incurred until the due date of the final report(s). If incurred, these costs must be liquidated prior to the due date of the final report(s) and charged to the final budget period of the award unless otherwise specified by the Federal agency.

§ 200.473 Training and education costs.

The cost of training and education provided for employee development is allowable.

§ 200.474 Transportation costs.

Costs incurred for freight, express, cartage, postage, and other transportation services relating to goods purchased, in process, or delivered, are allowable. When the costs can be readily identified with the items involved, they may be charged directly as transportation costs or added to the cost of such items. When identification with the materials received cannot be readily made, the inbound transportation cost may be charged to the appropriate indirect cost accounts if the recipient or subrecipient follows a consistent, equitable procedure in this respect. If reimbursable under the terms and conditions of the Federal award, outbound freight should be treated as a direct cost.

§ 200.475 Travel costs.

(a) General.  Travel costs include the transportation, lodging, subsistence, and related items incurred by employees who are in travel status on official business of the recipient or subrecipient. These costs may be charged on an actual cost basis, on a per diem or mileage basis, or on a combination of the two, provided the method used is applied to an entire trip and not to selected days of the trip. The method used must be consistent with those normally allowed in like circumstances in the recipient's or subrecipient's other activities and in accordance with the recipient's or subrecipient's established written policies. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 200.444, travel costs of officials covered by that section are allowable with the prior written approval of the Federal agency or pass-through entity when they are specifically related to the Federal award.

(b) Lodging and subsistence.  Costs incurred by employees and officers for travel, including costs of lodging, other subsistence, and incidental expenses, must be considered reasonable and otherwise allowable only to the extent such costs do not exceed charges normally allowed by the recipient or subrecipient in its regular operations as the result of the recipient's or subrecipient's established written policy. In addition, if these costs are charged directly to the Federal award documentation must justify that:

(1) Participation of the individual is necessary for the Federal award; and

(2) The costs are reasonable and consistent with the recipient's or subrecipient's established written policy.

(c) Dependents. (1) Temporary dependent care costs (dependent is defined in 26 U.S.C. 152) above and beyond regular dependent care are allowable provided that these costs:

(i) Are a direct result of the individual's travel to a conference for the Federal award;

(ii) Are consistent with the recipient's or subrecipient's established written policy for all travel; and

(iii) Are only temporary during the travel period.

(2) Travel costs for dependents are unallowable, except for travel of six months or more with prior approval of the Federal agency. See § 200.432.

(d) Establishing rates and amounts.  In the absence of an established written policy regarding travel costs, the rates and amounts established under 5 U.S.C. 5701-11 (“Travel and Subsistence Expenses; Mileage Allowances”), by the Administrator of General Services, or by the President (or their designee) pursuant to any provisions of such subchapter must apply to travel under Federal awards (48 CFR 31.205-46(a)).

(e) Commercial air travel. (1) Airfare costs in excess of the basic least expensive unrestricted accommodations class offered by commercial airlines are unallowable except when such accommodations would:

(i) Require circuitous routing;

(ii) Require travel during unreasonable hours;

(iii) Excessively prolong travel;

(iv) Result in additional costs that would offset the transportation savings; or

(v) Offer accommodations not reasonably adequate for the traveler's medical needs. The recipient or subrecipient must justify and document these conditions on a case-by-case basis for the use of first-class or business-class airfare to be allowable in such cases.

(2) Unless a pattern of avoidance is detected, the Federal Government will generally not question a recipient's or subrecipient's determinations that customary standard airfare or other discount airfare is unavailable for specific trips if the recipient or subrecipient can demonstrate that such airfare was not available in the specific case.

(f) Air travel by other than commercial carrier.  Travel costs by recipient or subrecipient-owned, -leased, or -chartered aircraft include the cost of the lease, charter, operation (including personnel costs), maintenance, depreciation, insurance, and other related costs. The portion of these costs that exceeds the cost of airfare, as provided for in paragraph (d), is unallowable.

§ 200.476 Trustees.

Travel and subsistence costs of trustees (or directors) at IHEs and nonprofit organizations are allowable. See § 200.475.

Subpart F—Audit Requirements

General

§ 200.500 Purpose.

This part sets forth standards for obtaining consistency and uniformity among Federal agencies for the audit of non-Federal entities expending Federal awards.

Audits

§ 200.501 Audit requirements.

(a) Audit required.  A non-Federal entity that expends $1,000,000 or more during the non-Federal entity's fiscal year in Federal awards must have a single or program-specific audit conducted for that year in accordance with the provisions of this part.

(b) Single audit.  A non-Federal entity that expends $1,000,000 or more in Federal awards during the non-Federal entity's fiscal year must have a single audit conducted in accordance with § 200.514 except when it elects to have a program-specific audit conducted in accordance with paragraph (c) or (d) of this section.

(c) Program-specific audit election (in general).  A non-Federal entity may elect to have a program-specific audit conducted in accordance with § 200.507 if the following conditions are met:

(1) The non-Federal entity expends Federal awards under only one Federal program (excluding research and development); and

(2) The Federal program's statutes or regulations, or terms and conditions of the Federal award, do not require a financial statement audit of the non-Federal entity.

(d) Program-specific audit election for research and development.  A non-Federal entity may elect to have a program-specific audit for research and development conducted in accordance with § 200.507, but only if all of the following conditions are met:

(1) The non-Federal entity expends Federal awards only from the same Federal agency, or the same Federal agency and the same pass-through entity; and

(2) The Federal agency, or pass-through entity in the case of a subrecipient, approves a program-specific audit in advance.

(e) Exemption when Federal awards expended are less than $1,000,000.  A non-Federal entity that expends less than $1,000,000 in Federal awards during its fiscal year is exempt from Federal audit requirements for that year, except as noted in § 200.503. However, in all instances, the records of the non-Federal entity must be available for review or audit by appropriate officials of the Federal agency, pass-through entity, and the Government Accountability Office (GAO).

(f) Federally Funded Research and Development Centers (FFRDC).  Management of an auditee that owns or operates a FFRDC may elect to treat the FFRDC as a separate entity for purposes of this part.

(g) Subrecipients and contractors.  An auditee may simultaneously be a recipient, a subrecipient, and a contractor. Unless a program is exempt by Federal statute, Federal awards expended as a recipient or a subrecipient are subject to audit under this part. Payments received for goods or services provided as a contractor under a Federal award (see § 200.331) are not subject to audit under this part.

(h) Compliance responsibility for contractors.  In most cases, the auditee's compliance responsibility for contractors is to ensure that the procurement, receipt, and payment for goods and services comply with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of a Federal award. Federal award compliance requirements normally do not flow down to contractors. However, for procurement transactions in which the contractor is made responsible for meeting program requirements, the auditee must ensure those requirements are met, including by clearly stating the contractor's responsibilities within the contract and reviewing the contractor's records to determine compliance. Also, when these procurement transactions relate to a major program, the scope of the audit must include a determination of whether these transactions comply with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of a Federal award. See also § 200.318(b).

(i) For-profit subrecipient.  This subpart does not apply to for-profit organizations. As necessary, the pass-through entity is responsible for establishing requirements to ensure compliance by for-profit subrecipients. The subaward with a for-profit subrecipient must describe applicable compliance requirements and the for-profit subrecipient's compliance responsibility. Methods to ensure compliance for Federal awards made to for-profit subrecipients may include pre-award audits, monitoring throughout the performance of the subaward, and post-award audits (see § 200.332).

§ 200.502 Basis for determining Federal awards expended.

(a) Determining Federal awards expended.  The determination of when a Federal award is expended must be based on when the activity related to the Federal award occurs. Generally, the activity related to the Federal award pertains to events that require the non-Federal entity to comply with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards, such as:

(1) Expenditure/expense transactions associated with grants, cooperative agreements, cost-reimbursement contracts under the FAR, compacts with Indian Tribes, and direct appropriations;

(2) The disbursement of funds to subrecipients;

(3) The use of loan proceeds under loan and loan guarantee programs;

(4) The receipt of property (including surplus property);

(5) The receipt or use of program income;

(6) The distribution or use of food commodities;

(7) The disbursement of amounts entitling the non-Federal entity to an interest subsidy; and

(8) The period when insurance is in force.

(b) Loan and loan guarantees (loans).  The Federal Government is at risk for loans until the debt is repaid. Therefore, the following guidelines must be used to calculate the value of Federal awards expended under loan programs (except as noted in paragraphs (c) and (d)):

(1) The value of new loans made or received during the audit period; plus

(2) The balance of loans from previous years at the beginning of the audit period for which the Federal Government imposes continuing compliance requirements; plus

(3) Any interest subsidy, cash, or administrative cost allowance received.

(c) Loan and loan guarantees (loans) at Institutions of Higher Education (IHE).  When loans are made to students of an IHE, but the IHE itself does not have continuing compliance requirements for the loans, then only the value of loans made during the audit period are considered Federal awards expended in that audit period. The balance of loans for previous audit periods is not included as Federal awards expended because the lender accounts for the prior balances.

(d) Prior loan and loan guarantees (loans).  Loans, the proceeds of which were received and expended in prior years, are not considered Federal awards expended under this part when Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards pertaining to such loans impose no continuing compliance requirements other than to repay the loans.

(e) Endowment funds.  The cumulative balance of Federal awards for endowment funds that are federally restricted is considered Federal awards expended in each audit period in which the funds are still restricted.

(f) Free rent.  Free rent received by itself is not considered a Federal award expended under this part. However, free rent received as part of a Federal award to carry out a Federal program must be included in determining Federal awards expended and is subject to audit under this part.

(g) Valuing non-cash assistance.  Federal non-cash assistance (such as free rent, food commodities, donated property, or donated surplus property that is received as part of a Federal award to carry out a Federal program) must be valued at fair market value at the time of receipt or the assessed value provided by the Federal agency and must be included in determining Federal awards expended under this part.

(h) Medicare.  Medicare payments to a non-Federal entity for providing patient care services to Medicare-eligible individuals are not considered Federal awards expended under this part.

(i) Medicaid.  Medicaid payments to a subrecipient for providing patient care services to Medicaid-eligible individuals are not considered Federal awards expended under this part unless a State requires the funds to be treated as Federal awards expended because reimbursement is on a cost-reimbursement basis.

(j) Certain loans provided by the National Credit Union Administration.  For purposes of this part, loans from the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund and the Central Liquidity Facility funded by contributions from insured non-Federal entities are not considered Federal awards expended.

§ 200.503 Relation to other audit requirements.

(a) Other financial audits.  An audit conducted in accordance with this part must be in lieu of any financial audit of Federal awards which a non-Federal entity is required to undergo under any other Federal statute or regulation. To the extent that such an audit provides a Federal agency with the information it requires to carry out its responsibilities under Federal statute or regulation, a Federal agency must rely upon and use that information.

(b) Conducting additional audits.  Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this section, a Federal agency, Inspectors General, or GAO may conduct or arrange additional audits to carry out its responsibilities under Federal statute or regulation. The provisions of this part do not authorize any non-Federal entity to constrain, in any manner, such Federal agency from carrying out or arranging for such additional audits, except that the Federal agency must plan such audits not to be duplicative of other audits of Federal awards. Prior to commencing such an audit, the Federal agency or pass-through entity must review the FAC for recent audits submitted by the non-Federal entity, and to the extent such audits meet a Federal agency or pass-through entity's needs, the Federal agency or pass-through entity must rely upon and use such audits. Any additional audits must be planned and performed in such a way as to build upon work performed, including the audit documentation, sampling, and testing already performed by other auditors.

(c) Authority to conduct additional audits.  The provisions of this part do not limit the authority of Federal agencies to conduct, or arrange for the conduct of, audits and evaluations of Federal awards, nor limit the authority of any Federal agency Inspector General or other Federal officials. For example, requirements that may be applicable under the FAR or CAS and the terms and conditions of a cost-reimbursement contract may include additional applicable audits to be conducted or arranged for by Federal agencies.

(d) Federal agency to pay for additional audits.  A Federal agency that conducts or arranges for additional audits must, consistent with other applicable Federal statutes and regulations, arrange for funding the full cost of such additional audits.

(e) Request for a program to be audited as a major program.  A Federal agency may request that an auditee have a particular Federal program audited as a major program in lieu of the Federal agency conducting or arranging for the additional audits. Such requests should be made at least 180 calendar days prior to the end of the fiscal year to be audited to allow for planning. After consultation with its auditor, the auditee should promptly respond to such a request by informing the Federal agency whether the program would otherwise be audited as a major program using the risk-based audit approach described in § 200.518 and, if not, the estimated incremental cost. The Federal agency must then promptly confirm to the auditee whether it wants the program audited as a major program. If the program is to be audited as a major program based upon this Federal agency request, and the Federal agency agrees to pay the full incremental costs, then the auditee must have the program audited as a major program. With approval of the Federal agency, a pass-through entity may use the provisions of this paragraph for a subrecipient.

§ 200.504 Frequency of audits.

Audits required by this part must be performed annually unless biennial audits are permitted under paragraph (a) or (b) of this section. Biennial audits must cover both fiscal years within the biennial period.

(a) A State, local government, or Indian Tribe that is required by constitution or statute, in effect on January 1, 1987, to undergo its audits less frequently than annually, is permitted to undergo biennial (every other year) audits pursuant to this part. This requirement must still be in effect for the biennial period.

(b) Any nonprofit organization that had biennial audits for all biennial periods ending between July 1, 1992, and January 1, 1995, is permitted to undergo biennial audits pursuant to this part.

§ 200.505 Remedies for audit noncompliance.

In cases of continued inability or unwillingness of a non-federal entity to have an audit conducted in accordance with this part, Federal agencies or pass-through entities must take appropriate action as provided in § 200.339.

§ 200.506 Audit costs.

See § 200.425.

§ 200.507 Program-specific audits.

(a) Program-specific audit guide available.  In some cases, a program-specific audit guide will be available to provide specific guidance to the auditor concerning internal controls, compliance requirements, suggested audit procedures, and audit reporting requirements. A listing of current program-specific audit guides can be found in the compliance supplement (Appendix VI, Program-Specific Audit Guides). When a current program-specific audit guide is available, the auditor must follow Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards (GAGAS) and the guide when performing a program-specific audit.

(b) Program-specific audit guide not available. (1) When a current program-specific audit guide is not available, the auditee and auditor must have basically the same responsibilities for the Federal program as they would have for an audit of a major program in a single audit.

(2) The auditee must prepare the financial statement(s) for the Federal program that includes a schedule of expenditures of Federal awards for the program and notes that describe the significant accounting policies used in preparing the schedule, a summary schedule of prior audit findings consistent with the requirements of § 200.511(b), and a corrective action plan consistent with the requirements of § 200.511(c).

(3) The auditor must:

(i) Perform an audit of the financial statement(s) for the Federal program in accordance with GAGAS;

(ii) Obtain an understanding of internal controls and perform tests of internal controls over the Federal program consistent with the requirements for a major program in accordance with§ 200.514(c);

(iii) Determine whether the auditee has complied with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards that could have a direct and material effect on the Federal program consistent with the requirements for a major program under § 200.514(d);

(iv) Follow up on prior audit findings and perform procedures to assess the reasonableness of the summary schedule of prior audit findings prepared by the auditee in accordance with the requirements of § 200.511 When the auditor concludes that the summary schedule of prior audit findings materially misrepresents the status of any prior audit finding, the auditor must report this condition as a current-year audit finding.; and

(v) Report any audit findings consistent with the requirements of § 200.516.

(4) The auditor's report(s) may be in the form of either combined or separate reports. It may be organized differently from the manner presented in this section. The auditor's report(s) must state that the audit was conducted in accordance with this part and include the following:

(i) An opinion (or disclaimer of opinion) as to whether the financial statement(s) of the Federal program is presented fairly in all material respects in accordance with the stated accounting policies;

(ii) A report on internal control related to the Federal program, which must describe the scope of testing of internal control and the results of the tests;

(iii) A report on compliance that includes an opinion (or disclaimer of opinion) as to whether the auditee complied with laws, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards which could have a direct and material effect on the Federal program; and

(iv) A schedule of findings and questioned costs for the Federal program that includes a summary of the auditor's results relative to the Federal program in a format consistent with § 200.515(d)(1) and findings and questioned costs consistent with the requirements of § 200.515(d)(3).

(c) Report submission for program-specific audits. (1) Submission deadline and public availability.  The audit must be completed and submitted in accordance with paragraph (c)(2) or (c)(3) of this section. Unless a different period is specified in the program-specific audit guide, the audit must be submitted within 30 calendar days after the auditee receives the auditor's report(s) or nine months after the end of the audit period (whichever is earlier). The submission is due the next business day when the due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or Federal holiday. Unless restricted by Federal law or regulation, the auditee must make copies of the reporting package available for public inspection. Auditees and auditors must ensure that their respective parts of the reporting package do not include protected personally identifiable information.

(2) Program-specific audit guide available.  When a program-specific audit guide is available, the auditee must electronically submit the data collection form prepared in accordance with § 200.512(b), as applicable to the program-specific audit, to the Federal Audit Clearinghouse (FAC). The submission must also include the reporting required by the program-specific audit guide.

(3) Program-specific audit guide not available.  When a program-specific audit guide is not available, the auditee must electronically submit the data collection form prepared in accordance with § 200.512(b) to the FAC. The submission must also include the financial statement(s) of the Federal program, summary schedule of prior audit findings, and corrective action plan as described in paragraph § 200.507(b)(2) and the auditor's report(s) described in paragraph § 200.507(b)(4).

(d) Other sections of this part may apply.  Program-specific audits are subject to:

(1) 200.500 Purpose through 200.503 Relation to other audit requirements, paragraph (d);

(2) 200.504 Frequency of audits through 200.506 Audit costs;

(3) 200.508 Auditee responsibilities through 200.509 Auditor selection;

(4) 200.511 Audit findings follow-up;

(5) 200.512 Report submission, paragraphs (e) through (h);

(6) 200.513 Responsibilities;

(7) 200.516 Audit findings through 200.517 Audit documentation;

(8) 200.521 Management decision; and

(9) Other referenced provisions of this part unless contrary to the provisions of this section, a program-specific audit guide, or program statutes and regulations.

Auditees

§ 200.508 Auditee responsibilities.

The auditee must:

(a) Arrange for the audit required by this part in accordance with § 200.509, and ensure it is properly performed and submitted in accordance with § 200.512.

(b) Prepare financial statements, including the schedule of expenditures of Federal awards in accordance with § 200.510.

(c) Promptly follow up and take corrective action on audit findings. This includes preparing a summary schedule of prior audit findings and a corrective action plan in accordance with § 200.511(b) and (c), respectively.

(d) Provide the auditor access to personnel, accounts, books, records, supporting documentation, and any other information needed for the auditor to perform the audit required by this part.

§ 200.509 Auditor selection.

(a) Auditor procurement.  When procuring audit services, the auditee must follow the procurement standards in §§ 200.317 through 200.327 of subpart D or the FAR (48 CFR part 42), as applicable. When requesting proposals for audit services, the objectives and scope of the audit must be made clear, and the non-Federal entity must request a copy of the audit organization's peer review report, which the auditor must provide under GAGAS. Factors to be considered in evaluating each proposal for audit services include the responsiveness to the request for proposal, relevant experience, availability of staff with professional qualifications and technical abilities, the results of peer and external quality control reviews, and price. Whenever possible, the auditee must make efforts to contract with businesses as stated in § 200.321 or the FAR (48 CFR part 42), as applicable.

(b) Restriction on auditor preparing indirect cost proposals.  An auditor who prepares the indirect cost proposal or cost allocation plan may not be selected to perform the audit required by this part when the indirect costs recovered by the auditee during the prior year exceed $1 million. This restriction applies to the base year used to prepare the indirect cost proposal or cost allocation plan and any subsequent years in which the resulting indirect cost agreement or cost allocation plan is used to recover costs.

(c) Use of Federal auditors.  Federal auditors may perform all or part of the work required under this part if they fully comply with the requirements of this part.

§ 200.510 Financial statements.

(a) Financial statements.  The auditee must prepare financial statements that reflect its financial position, results of operations or changes in net assets, and, where appropriate, cash flows for the fiscal year audited. The financial statements must be for the same organizational unit and fiscal year chosen to meet this part's requirements. However, organization-wide financial statements of the non-Federal entity may also include departments, agencies, and other organizational units that have separate audits in accordance with § 200.514(a) and prepare separate financial statements.

(b) Schedule of expenditures of Federal awards.  The auditee must also prepare a schedule of expenditures of Federal awards for the period covered by the auditee's financial statements. The schedule must include the total Federal awards expended as determined in accordance with § 200.502. The auditee may choose to provide information requested by Federal agencies or pass-through entities to make the schedule easier to use. For example, when a Federal program has multiple Federal award years, the auditee may separately list the amount of Federal awards expended for each year of a Federal award. The schedule must:

(1) List individual Federal programs by Federal agency using the applicable Assistance Listing number(s). For a cluster of programs, the non-Federal entity must provide the cluster name, a list of individual Federal programs within the cluster, and provide the Federal agency name and the applicable Assistance Listing number(s). For research and development, total Federal awards expended must be shown either by individual Federal award or by Federal agency and major subdivision within the Federal agency. For example, the National Institutes of Health is a major subdivision within the Department of Health and Human Services.

(2) For Federal awards received as a subrecipient, the name of the pass-through entity and identifying number assigned by the pass-through entity must be included.

(3) Provide total Federal awards expended for each individual Federal program and the Assistance Listings number or other identifying number when the Assistance Listings information is unavailable. For a cluster of programs, the auditee must also provide the total for the cluster.

(4) Include the total amount provided to subrecipients from each Federal program.

(5) For loan or loan guarantee programs described in § 200.502(b), identify in the notes to the schedule the balances outstanding at the end of the audit period. This requirement is in addition to including the total Federal awards expended for loan or loan guarantee programs in the schedule.

(6) Include notes describing the significant accounting policies used in preparing the schedule and whether the auditee elected to use the de minimis indirect cost rate of up to 15 percent (see § 200.414).

§ 200.511 Audit findings follow-up.

(a) General.  The auditee is responsible for follow-up and corrective action on all audit findings. As part of this responsibility, the auditee must prepare a summary schedule of prior audit findings. The auditee must also prepare a corrective action plan for current year audit findings. The summary schedule of prior audit findings and the corrective action plan must include the reference numbers the auditor assigns to audit findings under § 200.516(c). Since the summary schedule may include audit findings from multiple years, it must include the fiscal year in which the finding initially occurred. The corrective action plan and summary schedule of prior audit findings must include financial statement findings that the auditor was required to report in accordance with GAGAS.

(b) Summary schedule of prior audit findings.  The summary schedule of prior audit findings must report the status of all audit findings included in the prior audit's schedule of findings and questioned costs. The summary schedule must also include audit findings reported in the prior audit's summary schedule of prior audit findings except audit findings listed as corrected in accordance with paragraph (b)(1) of this section or no longer valid or not warranting further action in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section.

(1) When audit findings were fully corrected, the summary schedule need only list the audit findings and state that corrective action was taken.

(2) When audit findings were not corrected or only partially corrected, the summary schedule must describe the reasons for the finding's recurrence, planned corrective action, and any partial corrective action taken. When the corrective action taken significantly differs from the corrective action previously reported in a corrective action plan or the Federal agency's or pass-through entity's management decision, the summary schedule must provide an explanation.

(3) When the auditee believes the audit findings are no longer valid or do not warrant further action, the reasons for this position must be described in the summary schedule. A valid reason for considering an audit finding as not warranting further action is that all of the following have occurred:

(i) Two years have passed since the audit report in which the finding occurred was submitted to the FAC;

(ii) The Federal agency or pass-through entity is not currently following up with the auditee on the audit finding; and

(iii) A management decision was not issued.

(c) Corrective action plan.  At the completion of the audit, the auditee must prepare a corrective action plan to address each audit finding included in the auditor's report for the current year. The corrective action plan must be a document separate from the auditor's findings described in § 200.516. The corrective action plan must also provide the name(s) of the contact person(s) responsible for the corrective action, the corrective action to be taken, and the anticipated completion date. When the auditee does not agree with the audit findings or believes corrective action is not required, the corrective action plan must include a detailed explanation of the reasons.

§ 200.512 Report submission.

(a) General. (1) The audit, the data collection form, and the reporting package must be submitted within 30 calendar days after the auditee receives the auditor's report(s) or nine months after the end of the audit period (whichever is earlier). The cognizant agency for audit or oversight agency for audit (in the absence of a cognizant agency for audit) may authorize an extension when the nine-month timeframe would place an undue burden on the auditee. If the due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or Federal holiday, the reporting package is due the next business day.

(2) The auditee must make copies available for public inspection unless restricted by Federal statute or regulation. Auditees and auditors must ensure that their respective parts of the reporting package do not include protected personally identifiable information.

(b) Data collection.  The FAC is the repository of record for subpart F reporting packages and the data collection form. All Federal agencies, pass-through entities and others interested in a reporting package and data collection form must obtain it by accessing the FAC.

(1) The auditee must submit the required data collection form described in Appendix X of this part. This form provides information about the auditee, its Federal programs, the results of the audit, and whether the audit was completed in accordance with this part. The form must include all information required by this part that is necessary for Federal agencies to use the audit to ensure the integrity of Federal programs. The form includes data elements and a format that OMB must approve, is available from the FAC, and include collections of information from the reporting package described in paragraph (c).

(2) A senior-level representative of the auditee (for example, a State controller, director of finance, chief executive officer, or chief financial officer) must sign a statement to be included as part of the data collection form stating that the auditee complied with the requirements of this part, including that:

(i) The data collection form was prepared in accordance with this part (and the instructions accompanying the form);

(ii) The reporting package does not include protected personally identifiable information;

(iii) The information included in its entirety is accurate and complete; and

(iv) The FAC is authorized to make the reporting package and the form publicly available on a website.

(3) An auditee that is an Indian Tribe or a tribal organization (as defined in the Indian Self-Determination, Education and Assistance Act (ISDEAA), 25 U.S.C. 450b(l)) may opt not to authorize the FAC to make the reporting package publicly available on a website. To opt-out, an Indian Tribe or tribal organization must exclude the authorization described in paragraph (b)(2)(iv) of this section. In these instances, the Indian Tribe is responsible for submitting the reporting package directly to any pass-through entities through which it has received a Federal award and to pass-through entities for which the summary schedule of prior audit findings reported the status of any findings related to those Federal awards that the pass-through entity provided. Unless restricted by Federal statute or regulation, if the Indian Tribe opts not to authorize publication, it must make copies of the reporting package available for public inspection.

(4) The auditor must complete the applicable data elements of the data collection form using the information included in the reporting package described in paragraph (c) of this section. The auditor must sign a statement to be included as part of the data collection form stating:

(i) The source of information included in the data collection form;

(ii) The auditor's responsibility for the information;

(iii) The data collection form is not a substitute for the reporting package described in paragraph (c); and

(iv) The content of the form is limited to the collection of information prescribed by OMB.

(c) Reporting package.  The reporting package must include the following:

(1) Financial statements and schedule of expenditures of Federal awards discussed in § 200.510(a) and (b), respectively;

(2) Summary schedule of prior audit findings discussed in § 200.511(b);

(3) Auditor's report(s) discussed in § 200.515; and

(4) Corrective action plan discussed in § 200.511(c).

(d) Submission to FAC.  The auditee must electronically submit the data collection form described in paragraph (b) of this section and the reporting package described in paragraph (c) of this section to the FAC.

(e) Requests for management letters issued by the auditor.  Auditees must submit, when requested by a Federal agency or pass-through entity, a copy of any management letters issued by the auditor.

(f) Report retention requirements.  Auditees must keep a copy of the data collection form described in paragraph (b) of this section and a copy of the reporting package described in paragraph (c) on file for three years from the date of submission to the FAC. Copies of audit records must be maintained in accordance with § 200.336.

(g) FAC responsibilities.  The FAC must make available the reporting packages received in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section and § 200.507(c) to the public, except for Indian Tribes exercising the option in paragraph (b)(3) of this section, and maintain a database of completed audits, provide appropriate information to Federal agencies, and follow up with known auditees that have not submitted the required data collection forms and reporting packages.

(h) Electronic filing.  Nothing in this part must preclude electronic submissions to the FAC in such a manner as may be approved by OMB.

Federal Agencies

§ 200.513 Responsibilities.

(a) Cognizant agency for audit responsibilities. (1) A non-Federal entity expending more than $50 million a year in Federal awards must have a cognizant agency for audit. The cognizant agency for audit must be the Federal agency that provides the largest amount of direct funding (as listed on the non-Federal entity's Schedule of expenditures of Federal awards, see § 200.510(b)) unless OMB designates a specific cognizant agency for audit. When the direct funding represents less than 25 percent of the total expenditures (as direct and subawards) by the non-Federal entity, then the Federal agency with the predominant amount of total funding is the designated cognizant agency for audit.

(2) To provide for continuity of cognizance, the determination of the predominant amount of direct funding must be based upon direct Federal awards expended in the non-Federal entity's fiscal years ending in 2019 and every fifth year after that.

(3) Notwithstanding how audit cognizance is determined, a Federal agency may reassign cognizance to another Federal agency that provides substantial funding to an auditee if it agrees to be the cognizant agency for audit. Within 30 calendar days after any reassignment, both the old and the new cognizant agency for audit must notify the FAC, the auditee, and the auditor (if known) of the change.

(4) The cognizant agency for audit must:

(i) Provide technical audit advice and liaison assistance to auditees and auditors.

(ii) Obtain or conduct quality control reviews on selected audits made by non-Federal auditors and provide the results to other interested organizations.

(iii) Cooperate and support the Federal agency designated by OMB to lead a government-wide analysis to assess the quality of single audits. The government-wide analysis may rely on the current and ongoing quality control review work performed by Federal agencies, State auditors, and professional audit associations. This government-wide audit analysis must be performed at an interval determined by OMB, and the results must be posted publicly. In providing support to the government-wide analysis, a Federal agency must provide the following:

(A) An assessment of the extent to which single audits conform to the requirements, standards, and procedures of this part; and

(B) Recommendations to address audit quality issues, including recommendations for any changes to this part's requirements, standards, and procedures.

(iv) Promptly inform the appropriate Federal law enforcement officials and impacted Federal agencies of any direct reporting by the auditee or its auditor required by GAGAS, Federal statute, or regulation.

(v) Advise the community of independent auditors of any noteworthy or important factual trends related to the quality of audits stemming from quality control reviews. Significant problems or quality issues consistently identified through quality control reviews of audit reports must be referred to appropriate State licensing agencies and professional bodies.

(vi) Advise the auditor, Federal awarding agencies, and, where appropriate, the auditee of any deficiencies found in the audits when the deficiencies require corrective action by the auditor. When advised of deficiencies, the auditee must work with the auditor to take corrective action. If corrective action is not taken, the cognizant agency for audit must notify the auditor, the auditee, and applicable Federal awarding agencies and pass-through entities of the facts and make recommendations for follow-up action. Major inadequacies or repetitive substandard performance by auditors must be referred to appropriate State licensing agencies and professional bodies for disciplinary action.

(vii) Coordinate, to the extent practical, audits or reviews made by or for Federal agencies that are in addition to the audits made pursuant to this part, so that the additional audits or reviews build upon, rather than duplicate, audits performed in accordance with this part.

(viii) Coordinate a management decision for cross-cutting audit findings that affect the Federal programs of more than one agency when requested by any Federal agency whose awards are included in the audit finding of the auditee. Cross-cutting audit finding means an audit finding where the same underlying condition or issue affects all Federal awards (including Federal awards of more than one Federal agency or pass-through entity); for example, a cross-cutting audit finding may include an issue related to the recipient's accounting system.

(ix) Coordinate the audit work and reporting responsibilities among auditors to achieve the most cost-effective audit.

(x) Provide advice to auditees as to how to handle changes in fiscal year.

(b) Oversight agency for audit responsibilities.  An auditee who does not have a designated cognizant agency for audit will be under the general oversight of the Federal agency determined in accordance with § 200.1 oversight agency for audit. A Federal agency with oversight for an auditee may reassign oversight to another Federal agency that agrees to be the oversight agency for audit. Within 30 calendar days after any reassignment, both the old and the new oversight agency for audit must provide notice of the change to the FAC, the auditee, and, if known, the auditor. The oversight agency for audit:

(1) Must provide technical advice and assistance to auditees and auditors.

(2) May assume all or some of the responsibilities normally performed by a cognizant agency for audit.

(c) Awarding Federal agency responsibilities.  In addition to all other requirements of this part, the awarding Federal agency must:

(1) Ensure that audits are completed, and reports are received in a timely manner in accordance with the requirements of this part.

(2) Provide technical advice and assistance to auditees and auditors.

(3) Follow-up on audit findings to ensure that non-Federal entities take appropriate and timely corrective action. Follow-up includes:

(i) Issuing a management decision in accordance with § 200.521;

(ii) Monitoring the non-Federal entity's progress implementing a corrective action;

(iii) Using a cooperative audit resolution approach to improve Federal program outcomes through better audit resolution, follow-up, and corrective action, which means the use of audit follow-up techniques promoting prompt corrective action by improving communication, fostering collaboration, promoting trust, and developing an understanding between the Federal agency and the non-Federal entity. This approach is based upon:

(A) A strong commitment by Federal agency and non-Federal entity leadership to Federal program integrity;

(B) Federal agencies strengthening partnerships and working cooperatively with non-Federal entities and their auditors; non-Federal entities and their auditors working cooperatively with Federal agencies;

(C) A focus on current conditions and corrective action going forward;

(D) Federal agencies offering appropriate relief for past noncompliance when audits show prompt corrective action has occurred; and

(E) Federal agency leadership sending a clear message that continued failure to correct conditions identified by audits likely to cause improper payments, fraud, waste, or abuse is unacceptable and will result in sanctions.

(iv) Tracking the effectiveness of the Federal agency's follow-up processes, the effectiveness of single audits in improving non-Federal entity accountability, and the use of single audits in making Federal award decisions. The Federal agency should develop a baseline, metrics, and targets to track, over time, the effectiveness of the Federal agency's process to follow up on audit findings.

(4) Provide OMB with annual updates to the compliance supplement. These updates include working with OMB to ensure that the compliance supplement focuses the auditor on testing the compliance requirements most likely to cause improper payments, fraud, waste, abuse, or generate audit findings for which the Federal agency will take action in accordance with § 200.505. Prior to submitting compliance supplement drafts to OMB, Federal agencies should engage with external audit stakeholders, the Federal agency's Office of Inspector General, and the National Single Audit Coordinator (NSAC).

(5) Provide OMB with the name of a single audit accountable official from among the senior policy officials of the Federal agency. The accountable official must be:

(i) Responsible for ensuring that the Federal agency fulfills the requirements of this section and effectively uses the single audit process to reduce improper payments and improve Federal program outcomes.

(ii) Accountable for improving the effectiveness of the Federal agency's single audit processes in accordance with paragraph (c)(3)(iv).

(iii) Responsible for designating the Federal agency's key management single audit liaison.

(6) Provide OMB with the name of a key management single audit liaison. The liaison must:

(i) Serve as the Federal agency's point of contact for the single audit process within and outside the Federal Government.

(ii) Promote interagency coordination, consistency, and information sharing. This includes coordinating audit follow-up, identifying higher risk non-Federal entities, providing input on single audit and follow-up policy, enhancing the utility of the FAC, and identifying ways to use single audit results to improve Federal award accountability and best practices.

(iii) Oversee training for the Federal agency's program management personnel related to the single audit process.

(iv) Promote the Federal agency's use of a cooperative audit resolution approach as described in paragraph (c)(3)(iii) of this section.

(v) Coordinate the Federal agency's audit follow-up processes and ensure non-Federal entities implement corrective actions for audit findings.

(vi) Ensure the Federal agency fulfills its responsibility, as a cognizant agency for audit, to coordinate a management decision for cross-cutting audit findings under (a)(4)(viii) of this section. Cross-cutting audit findings means an audit finding where the same underlying condition or issue affects all Federal awards (including Federal awards of more than one Federal agency or pass-through entity). For example, this may include an issue related to the recipient's accounting system.

(vii) Ensure the Federal agency provides OMB with annual updates to the compliance supplement consistent with the compliance supplement preparation guide.

(viii) Support the mission of the Federal agency's single audit accountable official and coordinate with the Federal agency's Office of Inspector General and National Single Audit Coordinator (NSAC).

Auditors

§ 200.514 Standards and scope of audit.

(a) General.  The audit must be conducted in accordance with GAGAS. The audit must also cover the entire operations of the auditee, or, at the option of the auditee, such audit must include a series of audits that cover departments, agencies, and other organizational units that expended or otherwise administered Federal awards during the audit period. In these instances, the audit must include the financial statements and schedule of expenditures of Federal awards for each such department, agency, and other organizational unit, which must be considered to be a non-Federal entity. The financial statements and schedule of expenditures of Federal awards must be for the same audit period.

(b) Financial statements.  The auditor must determine whether the auditee's financial statements are presented fairly in all material respects in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (or a special purpose framework such as cash, modified cash, or regulatory as required by State law). The auditor must also determine whether the schedule of expenditures of Federal awards is stated fairly in all material respects in relation to the auditee's financial statements as a whole.

(c) Internal control. (1) The compliance supplement provides guidance on internal controls over Federal programs based upon the guidance in Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government issued by the Comptroller General of the United States and the Internal Control-Integrated Framework, issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).

(2) In addition to the requirements of GAGAS, the auditor must perform procedures to obtain an understanding of internal control over Federal programs sufficient to plan the audit to support a low assessed level of control risk of noncompliance for major programs.

(3) Except as provided in paragraph (c)(4) of this section, the auditor must:

(i) Plan the testing of internal control over compliance for major programs to support a low assessed level of control risk for assertions relevant to the compliance requirements for each major program; and

(ii) Perform testing of internal control as planned in paragraph (c)(3)(i) of this section.

(4) When internal control over some or all of the compliance requirements for a major program are likely to be ineffective in preventing or detecting noncompliance, the planning and performing of testing described in paragraph (c)(3) of this section are not required for those compliance requirements. However, the auditor must report a significant deficiency or material weakness in accordance with § 200.516, assess the related control risk at the maximum, and consider whether additional compliance tests are required because of ineffective internal control.

(d) Compliance. (1) In addition to the requirements of GAGAS, the auditor must determine whether the auditee has complied with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards that may have a direct and material effect on each of its major programs.

(2) The principal compliance requirements applicable to most Federal programs and the compliance requirements of the largest Federal programs are included in the compliance supplement.

(3) For the compliance requirements related to Federal programs contained in the compliance supplement, an audit of these compliance requirements will meet the requirements of this part. Where there have been changes to the compliance requirements, and the changes are not reflected in the compliance supplement, the auditor must determine the current compliance requirements and modify the audit procedures accordingly. For those Federal programs not covered in the compliance supplement, the auditor must follow the compliance supplement's guidance for programs not included.

(4) The compliance testing must include tests of transactions or other auditing procedures necessary to provide the auditor with sufficient appropriate audit evidence to support an opinion on compliance.

(e) Audit follow-up.  The auditor must follow up on prior audit findings regardless of whether a prior audit finding is related to a major program in the current year. Audit follow-up includes performing procedures to assess the reasonableness of the summary schedule of prior audit findings prepared by the auditee in accordance with the requirements of § 200.511. When the auditor concludes that the summary schedule of prior audit findings materially misrepresents the status of any prior audit finding, the auditor must report this condition as a current-year audit finding.

(f) Data collection form.  As required in § 200.512(b)(4), the auditor must complete and sign specified sections of the data collection form.

§ 200.515 Audit reporting.

The auditor's report(s) may be in the form of either combined or separate reports. It may be organized differently from the manner presented in this section. The auditor's report(s) must state that the audit was conducted in accordance with this part and include the following:

(a) An opinion (or disclaimer of opinion) on whether the financial statement(s) of the auditee is presented fairly in all material respects in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (or a special purpose framework such as cash, modified cash, or regulatory as required by State law). The auditor must also decide whether the schedule of expenditures of Federal awards is stated fairly in all material respects in relation to the auditee's financial statements as a whole.

(b) A report on internal control over financial reporting and compliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and award agreements, noncompliance with which could have a material effect on the financial statements. This report must describe the scope of internal control and compliance testing and the results of the tests. Where applicable, the report must refer to the separate schedule of findings and questioned costs described in paragraph (d) of this section.

(c) A report on compliance for each major program and a report on internal control over compliance. This report must describe the scope of testing of internal control over compliance and include an opinion (or disclaimer of opinion) as to whether the auditee complied with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards that could have a direct and material effect on each major program and refer to the separate schedule of findings and questioned costs described in paragraph (d) of this section.

(d) A schedule of findings and questioned costs which must include the following three components:

(1) A summary of the auditor's results, which must include:

(i) The type of report the auditor issued (unmodified opinion, qualified opinion, adverse opinion, or disclaimer of opinion) on whether the audited financial statements were prepared in accordance with GAAP;

(ii) A statement about whether significant deficiencies or material weaknesses in internal control were disclosed by the audit of the financial statements;

(iii) A statement as to whether the audit disclosed any noncompliance that is material to the financial statements of the auditee;

(iv) A statement about whether significant deficiencies or material weaknesses in internal control over major programs were disclosed by the audit;

(v) The type of report the auditor issued (unmodified opinion, qualified opinion, adverse opinion, or disclaimer of opinion) on compliance for major programs;

(vi) A statement as to whether the audit disclosed any audit findings that the auditor is required to report under § 200.516(a);

(vii) An identification of major programs by listing each individual major program; however, in the case of a cluster of programs, only the cluster name as shown on the schedule of expenditures of Federal Awards is required; (viii) The dollar threshold used to distinguish between Type A and Type B programs, as described in § 200.518(b)(1) or (3) when a recalculation of the Type A threshold is required for large loan or loan guarantees; and

(ix) A statement as to whether the auditee qualified as a low-risk auditee under§ 200.520.

(2) Findings relating to the financial statements required to be reported in accordance with GAGAS.

(3) Findings and questioned costs for Federal awards which must include audit findings as defined in § 200.516(a) and be reported in the following manner:

(i) Audit findings (for example, internal control findings, compliance findings, questioned costs, or fraud) that relate to the same issue must be presented as a single audit finding. Where practical, audit findings should be organized by Federal agency or pass-through entity.

(ii) Audit findings that relate to both the financial statements (paragraph (d)(2) of this section) and Federal awards (this paragraph (d)(3)) must be reported in both sections of the schedule. However, the reporting in one section of the schedule may be in summary form and reference a detailed reporting in the other section.

(e) Nothing in this part precludes combining the reporting required by this section with the reporting required by § 200.512(b) when allowed by GAGAS and Appendix X of this part.

§ 200.516 Audit findings.

(a) Audit findings reported.  The auditor must report the following as an audit finding in the schedule of findings and questioned costs:

(1) Significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in internal control over major programs. The auditor's determination of whether a deficiency in internal control is a significant deficiency or a material weakness for the purpose of reporting an audit finding is in relation to a type of compliance requirement for a major program identified in the compliance supplement.

(2) Material noncompliance with the provisions of Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of Federal awards related to a major program. The auditor's determination of whether noncompliance with the provisions of Federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of Federal awards is material for the purpose of reporting an audit finding is in relation to a type of compliance requirement for a major program identified in the compliance supplement.

(3) Known questioned costs when either known or likely questioned costs are greater than $25,000 for a type of compliance requirement for a major program. When reporting questioned costs, the auditor must include information to provide proper perspective for evaluating the prevalence and consequences of the questioned costs.

(4) Known questioned costs greater than $25,000 for a Federal program that is not audited as a major program. Except for audit follow-up, the auditor is not required to perform audit procedures for such a Federal program; therefore, the auditor will normally not find questioned costs for a program that is not audited as a major program. However, if the auditor does become aware of questioned costs for a Federal program that is not audited as a major program (for example, as part of audit follow-up or other audit procedures) and the known questioned costs are greater than $25,000, the auditor must report this as an audit finding.

(5) The circumstances concerning why the auditor's report on compliance for each major program is other than an unmodified opinion. This must be included unless the circumstances are otherwise reported as audit findings in the schedule of findings and questioned costs.

(6) Known or likely fraud affecting a Federal award, unless the fraud is otherwise reported as an audit finding in the schedule of findings and questioned costs. This paragraph does not require the auditor to publicly report information that could compromise investigative or legal proceedings or to make an additional reporting when the auditor confirms that the fraud was reported outside the auditor's reports under the direct reporting requirements of GAGAS.

(7) Instances where the results of audit follow-up procedures disclosed that the summary schedule of prior audit findings prepared by the auditee in accordance with § 200.511(b) materially misrepresents the status of any prior audit finding.

(b) Audit finding detail and clarity.  Audit findings must be presented with sufficient detail and clarity for the auditee to prepare a corrective action plan and take corrective action and for Federal agencies or pass-through entities to arrive at a management decision. As applicable, the following information must be included in audit findings:

(1) The Federal program and specific Federal award identification, including the Assistance Listings title and number, Federal award identification number and year, the name of the Federal agency, and name of the applicable pass-through entity. When information, such as the Assistance Listings title and number or Federal award identification number, is unavailable, the auditor must provide the best information available to describe the Federal award.

(2) The criteria or specific requirement for the audit finding (for example, the specific Federal statute, regulation, or term and condition of the Federal award). The criteria or specific requirement provides a context for evaluating evidence and understanding findings. The criteria should generally identify the required or desired state or expectation with respect to the program or operation.

(3) The condition found, including facts that support the deficiency identified in the audit finding.

(4) A statement of cause that identifies the reason or explanation for the condition or the factors responsible for the difference between the situation that exists (condition) and the required or desired state (criteria), which may also serve as a basis for recommendations for corrective action

(5) The possible asserted effect to provide sufficient information to the auditee and Federal agency or pass-through entity to permit them to determine the cause and effect to facilitate prompt and proper corrective action. A statement of the effect or potential effect should provide a clear, logical link to establish the impact or potential impact of the difference between the condition and the criteria.

(6) The identification of known questioned costs, by applicable Assistance Listing number(s) and Federal award identification number(s), and how these questioned costs were computed.

(7) When there are known questioned costs but the dollar amount is undetermined or not reported, a description of why the dollar amount was undetermined or otherwise could not be reported.

(8) Information to provide proper perspective for evaluating the prevalence and consequences of the audit finding. For example, whether the audit finding represents an isolated instance or a systemic problem. Where appropriate, instances identified must be related to the universe and the number of cases examined and be quantified in terms of dollar value. In addition, the audit finding should indicate whether the sampling was a statistically valid sample.

(9) The identification of whether the audit finding is a repeat of a finding in the immediately prior audit. The audit finding must identify the applicable prior year audit finding reference numbers in these instances.

(10) Recommendations to prevent future occurrences of the deficiency identified in the audit finding.

(11) Views of responsible officials of the auditee.

(c) Reference numbers.  Each audit finding in the schedule of findings and questioned costs must include a reference number in the format meeting the requirements of the data collection form submission (see § 200.512(b)).

§ 200.517 Audit documentation.

(a) Retention of audit documentation.  The auditor must retain audit documentation and reports for a minimum of three years after the date of issuance of the auditor's report(s) to the auditee. The cognizant agency for audit, oversight agency for audit, cognizant agency for indirect costs, or pass-through entity may extend the retention period by providing written notification to the auditor. When the auditor is aware that the Federal agency, pass-through entity, or auditee is contesting an audit finding, the auditor must contact the parties contesting the audit finding for guidance prior to the destruction of the audit documentation and reports.

(b) Access to audit documentation.  Audit documentation must be made available upon request to the cognizant or oversight agency for audit or its designee, cognizant agency for indirect cost, a Federal agency, or GAO at the completion of the audit, as part of a quality review, to resolve audit findings, or to carry out oversight responsibilities consistent with the purposes of this part. Access to audit documentation includes the right of Federal agencies to obtain copies of audit documentation as is reasonable and necessary.

§ 200.518 Major program determination.

(a) General.  The auditor must use a risk-based approach to determine which Federal programs are major programs. This risk-based approach must consider current and prior audit experience, oversight by Federal agencies and pass-through entities, and the inherent risk of the Federal program. The process described in paragraphs (b) through (h) of this section must be followed.

(b) Step one. (1) The auditor must identify and label the larger Federal programs as Type A programs. Type A programs are defined as Federal programs with Federal awards expended during the audit period exceeding the levels outlined in table 1:

Table 1 to Paragraph (b)(1)

Total Federal awards expended

Type A threshold

Equal to or exceed $1,000,000 but less than or equal to $34 million

$1,000,000.

Exceed $34 million but less than or equal to $100 million

Total Federal awards expended times .03.

Exceed $100 million but less than or equal to $1 billion

$3 million.

Exceed $1 billion but less than or equal to $10 billion

Total Federal awards expended times .003.

Exceed $10 billion but less than or equal to $20 billion

$30 million.

Exceed $20 billion

Total Federal awards expended times .0015.

(2) Federal programs not labeled Type A under paragraph (b)(1) of this section must be labeled Type B programs.

(3) Including large loans and loan guarantees (loans) must not result in the exclusion of other programs as Type A programs. A Federal program providing loans is considered a large loan program when it exceeds four times the largest non-loan program. The auditor must identify each large loan program as a Type A program and exclude its values in determining other Type A programs. This recalculation of the Type A program is performed after removing the total of all large loan programs. For this paragraph, a program is only considered a Federal program providing loans if the value of Federal awards expended for loans within the program comprises 50 percent or more of the total Federal awards expended for the program. A cluster of programs is treated as one program, and the value of Federal awards expended under a loan program is determined as described in § 200.502.

(4) For biennial audits (see § 200.504), the determination of Type A and Type B programs must be based on the Federal awards expended during the two-year audit period.

(c) Step two. (1) The auditor must identify Type A programs that are low-risk. In making this determination, the auditor must consider whether the requirements in § 200.519(c), the results of audit follow-up, or any changes in personnel or systems affecting the program indicate significantly increased risk and preclude the program from being low-risk. For a Type A program to be considered low-risk, it must have been audited as a major program in at least one of the two most recent audit periods (in the most recent audit period in the case of a biennial audit), and, in the most recent audit period, the program must not have had:

(i) Internal control deficiencies that were identified as material weaknesses in the auditor's report on internal control for major programs as required under § 200.515(c);

(ii) A modified opinion on the program in the auditor's report on major programs as required under § 200.515(c); or

(iii) Known or likely questioned costs that exceed five percent of the total Federal awards expended for the program.

(2) Notwithstanding paragraph (c)(1) of this section, OMB may approve a Federal agency request that a Type A program not be considered low-risk for a specific recipient. For example, it may be necessary for a large Type A program to be audited as a major program each year for a particular recipient for the Federal agency to comply with 31 U.S.C. 3515. The Federal agency must notify the auditee and, if known, the auditor of OMB's approval at least 180 calendar days prior to the end of the fiscal year to be audited.

(d) Step three. (1) The auditor must identify high-risk Type B programs using professional judgment and the criteria in § 200.519. However, the auditor is not required to identify more high-risk Type B programs than at least one-fourth of the number of low-risk Type A programs identified as low-risk under step two. Except for known material weakness in internal control or compliance problems as discussed in § 200.519(b)(1), (2), and (c)(1), a single criterion in risk would rarely cause a Type B program to be considered high-risk. When identifying which Type B programs to assess for risk, the auditor is encouraged to use an approach that provides an opportunity for different high-risk Type B programs to be audited as major programs over a period of time.

(2) The auditor is not expected to perform risk assessments on relatively small Federal programs. Therefore, the auditor is only required to perform risk assessments on Type B programs that exceed 25 percent (0.25) of the Type A threshold determined in step one.

(e) Step four.  At a minimum, the auditor must audit all of the following as major programs:

(1) All Type A programs not identified as low-risk under step two.

(2) All Type B programs identified as high-risk under step three.

(3) Additional programs as necessary to comply with the percentage of coverage rule described in paragraph (f). This rule may require the auditor to audit more programs as major programs than the number of Type A programs.

(f) Percentage of coverage rule.  When the auditee meets the criteria in § 200.520, the auditor only needs to audit the major programs identified in paragraphs (e)(1) and (2) of this section and such additional Federal programs with Federal awards expended that, in the aggregate, all major programs encompass at least 20 percent (0.20) of total Federal awards expended. Otherwise, the auditor must audit the major programs identified in paragraphs (e)(1) and (2) of this section and such additional Federal programs with Federal awards expended that, in the aggregate, all major programs encompass at least 40 percent (0.40) of total Federal awards expended.

(g) Documentation of risk.  The auditor must include in the audit documentation the risk analysis used for determining major programs.

(h) Auditor's judgment.  The auditor's judgment in applying the risk-based approach to determine major programs must be presumed correct when the determination was performed and documented in accordance with this part. Challenges by a Federal agency or pass-through entity must only be for clearly improper use of the requirements in this part. However, a Federal agency or pass-through entity may provide auditors guidance about the risk of a particular Federal program. The auditor must consider this guidance in determining major programs in audits not yet completed.

§ 200.519 Criteria for Federal program risk.

(a) General.  The auditor's determination should be based on an overall evaluation of the risk of noncompliance occurring that could be material to the Federal program. The auditor must consider criteria, such as those described in paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this section, to identify risk in Federal programs. Also, as part of the risk analysis, the auditor may wish to discuss a particular Federal program with auditee management and the Federal agency or pass-through entity.

(b) Current and prior audit experience. (1) Weaknesses in internal control over Federal programs would indicate higher risk. Therefore, consideration should be given to the control environment over Federal programs. This includes considering factors such as the expectation of management's adherence to Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of Federal awards, and the competence and experience of personnel who administer the Federal programs.

(i) A Federal program administered under multiple internal control structures may have higher risk. When assessing risk in a large single audit, the auditor must consider whether weaknesses are isolated in a single operating unit (for example, one college campus) or pervasive throughout the entity.

(ii) A weak system for monitoring subrecipients would indicate higher risk when significant parts of a Federal program are passed to subrecipients through subawards.

(2) Prior audit findings would indicate higher risk, especially when the situations identified in the audit findings could significantly impact a Federal program or have not been corrected.

(3) Federal programs not recently audited as major programs may be of higher risk than those recently audited as major programs without audit findings.

(c) Oversight exercised by Federal agencies and pass-through entities. (1) The oversight exercised by Federal agencies or pass-through entities may be used to assess risk. For example, recent monitoring or other reviews performed by an oversight entity that disclosed no significant problems would indicate lower risk, whereas monitoring that disclosed significant problems would indicate higher risk.

(2) With the concurrence of OMB, a Federal agency may identify Federal programs that are higher risk. OMB will identify these Federal programs in the compliance supplement.

(d) Inherent risk of the Federal program. (1) The nature of a Federal program may indicate risk. Consideration should be given to the complexity of the program and the extent to which the Federal program contracts for goods and services. For example, Federal programs that disburse funds through third-party contracts or have eligibility criteria may be higher risk. Federal programs primarily involving staff payroll costs may be at high risk for noncompliance with the requirements of § 200.430 but otherwise be at low risk.

(2) The phase of a Federal program in its lifecycle at the Federal agency may indicate risk. For example, a new Federal program with new or interim regulations may have higher risk than an established program with time-tested regulations. Also, significant changes in Federal programs, statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of Federal awards may increase risk.

(3) The phase of a Federal program in its lifecycle at the auditee may indicate risk. For example, during the first and last years that an auditee participates in a Federal program, the risk may be higher due to the start-up or closeout of program activities and staff.

(4) Type B programs with larger Federal awards expended would be of higher risk than programs with substantially smaller Federal awards expended.

§ 200.520 Criteria for a low-risk auditee.

An auditee that meets all of the following conditions for each of the preceding two audit periods must qualify as a low-risk auditee and be eligible for reduced audit coverage in accordance with § 200.518.

(a) Single audits were performed on an annual basis in accordance with the provisions of this subpart, including submitting the data collection form and the reporting package to the FAC within the timeframe specified in § 200.512. A non-Federal entity that has biennial audits does not qualify as a low-risk auditee.

(b) The auditor's opinion on whether the financial statements were prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (or a special purpose framework such as cash, modified cash, or regulatory as required by State law), and the auditor's in-relation-to opinion on the schedule of expenditures of Federal awards were unmodified.

(c) No internal control deficiencies were identified as material weaknesses under the requirements of GAGAS.

(d) The auditor did not report a substantial doubt about the auditee's ability to continue as a going concern.

(e) None of the Federal programs had audit findings from any of the following in either of the preceding two audit periods in which they were classified as Type A programs:

(1) Internal control deficiencies that were identified as material weaknesses in the auditor's report on internal control for major programs as required under § 200.515(c);

(2) A modified opinion on a major program in the auditor's report on major programs as required under § 200.515(c); or

(3) Known or likely questioned costs that exceeded five percent (.05) of the total Federal awards expended for a Type A program during the audit period.

Management Decisions

§ 200.521 Management decisions.

(a) General.  The management decision must clearly state whether or not the audit finding is sustained, the reasons for the decision, and the expected auditee action to repay disallowed costs, make financial adjustments or take other action. If the auditee has not completed corrective action, a timetable for follow-up should be given. Prior to issuing the management decision, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may request additional information or documentation from the auditee, including a request for auditor assurance related to the documentation, as a way of mitigating disallowed costs. The management decision should describe any appeal process available to the auditee. While not required, the Federal agency or pass-through entity may also issue a management decision on findings relating to the financial statements, which are required to be reported in accordance with GAGAS.

(b) Federal agency.  The cognizant agency for audit is responsible for coordinating a management decision for audit findings that affect the programs of more than one Federal agency (see § 200.513(a)(4)(viii)). The awarding Federal agency is responsible for issuing a management decision for audit findings that affect the Federal awards it makes to a non-Federal entity (see § 200.513(c)(3)(i)).

(c) Pass-through entity.  The pass-through entity is responsible for issuing a management decision for audit findings that affect subawards it issues to subrecipients under a Federal award (see § 200.332(e)).

(d) Time requirements.  The Federal agency or pass-through entity responsible for issuing a management decision must do so within six months of the FAC's acceptance of the audit report. The auditee must initiate and proceed with corrective action as rapidly as possible and corrective action should begin no later than upon receipt of the audit report.

(e) Reference numbers.  Management decisions must include the reference numbers the auditor assigned to each audit finding in accordance with § 200.516(c).


PART 240—QUALIFICATION AND CERTIFICATION OF LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEERS

Authority:49 U.S.C. 20103, 20107, 20135, 21301, 21304, 21311; 28 U.S.C. 2461 note; and 49 CFR 1.89.

Source:56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, unless otherwise noted.

Subpart A—General

§ 240.1 Purpose and scope.

(a) The purpose of this part is to ensure that only qualified persons operate a locomotive or train.

(b) This part prescribes minimum Federal safety standards for the eligibility, training, testing, certification and monitoring of all locomotive engineers to whom it applies. This part does not restrict a railroad from adopting and enforcing additional or more stringent requirements not inconsistent with this part.

(c) The locomotive engineer certification requirements prescribed in this part apply to any person who meets the definition of locomotive engineer contained in § 240.7, regardless of the fact that the person may have a job classification title other than that of locomotive engineer.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 64 FR 60988, Nov. 8, 1999; 85 FR 81307, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.3 Application and responsibility for compliance.

(a) This part applies to all railroads, except:

(1) Railroads that operate only on track inside an installation that is not part of the general railroad system of transportation (i.e., plant railroads, as defined in § 240.7);

(2) Tourist, scenic, historic, or excursion operations that are not part of the general railroad system of transportation as defined in § 240.7; or

(3) Rapid transit operations in an urban area that are not connected to the general railroad system of transportation.

(b) Although the duties imposed by this part are generally stated in terms of the duty of a railroad, each person, including a contractor for a railroad, who performs any function covered by this part must perform that function in accordance with this part.

[85 FR 81307, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.5 Effect and construction.

(a) FRA does not intend, by use of the term locomotive engineer in this part, to alter the terms, conditions, or interpretation of existing collective bargaining agreements that employ other job classification titles when identifying a person authorized by a railroad to operate a locomotive.

(b) FRA does not intend by issuance of these regulations to alter the authority of a railroad to initiate disciplinary sanctions against its employees, including managers and supervisors, in the normal and customary manner, including those contained in its collective bargaining agreements.

(c) Except as provided in § 240.308, nothing in this part shall be construed to create or prohibit an eligibility or entitlement to employment in other service for the railroad as a result of denial, suspension, or revocation of certification under this part.

(d) Nothing in this part shall be deemed to abridge any additional procedural rights or remedies not inconsistent with this part that are available to the employee under a collective bargaining agreement, the Railway Labor Act, or (with respect to employment at will) at common law with respect to removal from service or other adverse action taken as a consequence of this part.

[85 FR 81307, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.7 Definitions.

As used in this part—

Administrator   means the Administrator of the Federal Railroad Administration or the Administrator's delegate.

Alcohol   means ethyl alcohol (ethanol) and includes use or possession of any beverage, mixture, or preparation containing ethyl alcohol.

Conductor   means the crewmember in charge of a “train or yard crew” as defined in part 218 of this chapter.

Controlled Substance   has the meaning assigned by 21 U.S.C. 802 and includes all substances listed on Schedules I through V as they may be revised from time to time (21 CFR parts 1301-1316).

Current Employee   is any employee with at least one year of experience in transportation service on a railroad.

Designated Supervisor of Locomotive Engineers   is a person designated as such by a railroad in accordance with the provisions of § 240.105 of this part.

Drug   means any substance (other than alcohol) that has known mind or function-altering effects on a human subject, specifically including any psychoactive substance and including, but not limited to, controlled substances.

Drug and alcohol counselor (DAC)   means a person who meets the credentialing and qualification requirements of a “Substance Abuse Professional” (SAP), as provided in 49 CFR part 40.

Dual purpose vehicle   means a piece of on-track equipment that is capable of moving railroad rolling stock and may also function as roadway maintenance equipment.

File, filed and filing   mean submission of a document under this part on the date when the DOT Docket Clerk or FRA receives it, or if sent by mail, the date mailing was completed.

FRA   means the Federal Railroad Administration.

FRA Representative   means the FRA Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety/Chief Safety Officer and the Associate Administrator's delegate, including any safety inspector employed by the Federal Railroad Administration and any qualified State railroad safety inspector acting under part 212 of this chapter.

Ineligible or ineligibility   means that a person is legally disqualified from serving as a certified locomotive engineer. The term covers a number of circumstances in which a person may not serve as a certified locomotive engineer. Revocation of certification pursuant to § 240.307 and denial of certification pursuant to § 240.219 are two examples in which a person would be ineligible to serve as a certified locomotive engineer. A period of ineligibility may end when a condition or conditions are met. For example, a period of ineligibility may end when a person meets the conditions to serve as a certified locomotive engineer following an alcohol or drug violation pursuant to § 240.119.

Instructor engineer,   as used in this part:

(1) Means a person who has demonstrated, pursuant to the railroad's written program, an adequate knowledge of the subjects under instruction and, where applicable, has the necessary operating experience to instruct effectively in the field, and has the following qualifications:

(i) Is a certified locomotive engineer under this part; and

(ii) Has been selected as such by a designated railroad officer, in concurrence with the designated employee representative, where present, to teach others proper train handling procedures; or

(iii) In absence of concurrence provided in paragraph (1)(ii) of this definition, has a minimum of 12 months service working in the class of service for which the person is designated to instruct.

(2) If a railroad does not have designated employee representation, then a person employed by the railroad need not comply with paragraph (1)(ii) or (iii) of this definition to be an instructor engineer.

Joint Operations   means rail operations conducted by more than one railroad on the same track regardless of whether such operations are the result of—

(1) Contractual arrangement between the railroads,

(2) Order of a governmental agency or a court of law, or

(3) Any other legally binding directive.

Knowingly   means having actual knowledge of the facts giving rise to the violation or that a reasonable person acting in the circumstances, exercising due care, would have had such knowledge.

Locomotive   means a piece of on-track equipment (other than specialized roadway maintenance equipment or a dual purpose vehicle operating in accordance with § 240.104(a)(2)):

(1) With one or more propelling motors designed for moving other equipment;

(2) With one or more propelling motors designed to carry freight or passenger traffic or both; or

(3) Without propelling motors but with one or more control stands.

Locomotive engineer   means any person who moves a locomotive or group of locomotives regardless of whether they are coupled to other rolling equipment except:

(1) A person who moves a locomotive or group of locomotives within the confines of a locomotive repair or servicing area as provided for in 49 CFR 218.5 and 218.29(a)(1); or

(2) A person who moves a locomotive or group of locomotives for distances of less than 100 feet and this incidental movement of a locomotive or locomotives is for inspection or maintenance purposes.

Main track   means a track upon which the operation of trains is governed by one or more of the following methods of operation: timetable; mandatory directive; signal indication; or any form of absolute or manual block system.

Medical examiner   means a person licensed as a doctor of medicine or doctor of osteopathy. A medical examiner can be a qualified, full-time salaried employee of a railroad, a qualified practitioner who contracts with the railroad on a fee-for-service or other basis, or a qualified practitioner designated by the railroad to perform functions in connection with medical evaluations of employees. As used in this rule, the medical examiner owes a duty to make an honest and fully informed evaluation of the condition of an employee.

On-the-job training (OJT)   means job training that occurs in the workplace, i.e., the employee learns the job while doing the job.

Person   means an entity of any type covered under 1 U.S.C. 1, including but not limited to the following: a railroad; a manager, supervisor, official, or other employee or agent of a railroad; any owner, manufacturer, lessor, or lessee of railroad equipment, track, or facilities; any independent contractor providing goods or services to a railroad; and any employee of such owner, manufacturer, lessor, lessee, or independent contractor.

Physical characteristics   means the actual track profile of and physical location for points within a specific yard or route that affect the movement of a locomotive or train. Physical characteristics includes both main track physical characteristics (see definition of “main track” in this section) and other than main track physical characteristics.

Plant railroad   means a plant or installation that owns or leases a locomotive, uses that locomotive to switch cars throughout the plant or installation, and is moving goods solely for use in the facility's own industrial processes. The plant or installation could include track immediately adjacent to the plant or installation if the plant railroad leases the track from the general system railroad and the lease provides for (and actual practice entails) the exclusive use of that trackage by the plant railroad and the general system railroad for purposes of moving only cars shipped to or from the plant. A plant or installation that operates a locomotive to switch or move cars for other entities, even if solely within the confines of the plant or installation, rather than for its own purposes or industrial processes, will not be considered a plant railroad because the performance of such activity makes the operation part of the general railroad system of transportation.

Qualified   means a person who has successfully completed all instruction, training and examination programs required by the employer and the applicable parts of this chapter, and that the person therefore may reasonably be expected to be proficient on all safety-related tasks the person is assigned to perform.

Railroad   means any form of nonhighway ground transportation that runs on rails or electromagnetic guideways and any entity providing such transportation, including

(1) Commuter or other short-haul railroad passenger service in a metropolitan or suburban area and commuter railroad service that was operated by the Consolidated Rail Corporation on January 1, 1979; and

(2) High speed ground transportation systems that connect metropolitan areas, without regard to whether those systems use new technologies not associated with traditional railroads; but does not include rapid transit operations in an urban area that are not connected to the general railroad system of transportation.

Railroad Officer   means any supervisory employee of a railroad.

Railroad rolling stock   is on-track equipment that is either a “railroad freight car” (as defined in § 215.5 of this chapter) or a “passenger car” (as defined in § 238.5 of this chapter).

Roadway maintenance equipment   is on-track equipment powered by any means of energy other than hand power which is used in conjunction with maintenance, repair, construction or inspection of track, bridges, roadway, signal, communications, or electric traction systems.

Segment   means any portion of a railroad assigned to the supervision of one superintendent or equivalent transportation officer.

Serve or service,   in the context of serving documents, has the meaning given in Rule 5 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure as amended. Similarly, the computation of time provisions in Rule 6 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure as amended are also applicable in this part. See also the definition of “filing” in this section.

Specialized roadway maintenance equipment   is roadway maintenance equipment that does not have the capability to move railroad rolling stock. Any alteration of such equipment that enables it to move railroad rolling stock will require that the equipment be treated as a dual purpose vehicle.

Substance abuse disorder   refers to a psychological or physical dependence on alcohol or a drug, or another identifiable and treatable mental or physical disorder involving the abuse of alcohol or drugs as a primary manifestation. A substance abuse disorder is “active” within the meaning of this part if the person is currently using alcohol or other drugs, except under medical supervision consistent with the restrictions described in § 219.103 of this chapter or has failed to complete primary treatment successfully or participate in aftercare successfully as directed by a DAC or SAP.

Substance Abuse Professional (SAP)   means a person who meets the qualifications of a Substance Abuse Professional, as provided in part 40 of this title.

Territorial qualifications   means possessing the necessary knowledge concerning a railroad's operating rules and timetable special instructions, including familiarity with applicable main track and other than main track physical characteristics of the territory over which the locomotive or train movement will occur.

Tourist, scenic, historic, or excursion operations that are not part of the general railroad system of transportation   means a tourist, scenic, historic, or excursion operation conducted only on track used exclusively for that purpose (i.e., there is no freight, intercity passenger, or commuter passenger railroad operation on the track).

Type I Simulator   means a replica of the control compartment of a locomotive with all associated control equipment that:

(1) Functions in response to a person's manipulation and causes the gauges associated with such controls to appropriately respond to the consequences of that manipulation;

(2) Pictorially, audibly and graphically illustrates the route to be taken;

(3) Graphically, audibly, and physically illustrates the consequences of control manipulations in terms of their effect on train speed, braking capacity, and in-train force levels throughout the train; and

(4) Is computer enhanced so that it can be programmed for specific train consists and the known physical characteristics of the line illustrated.

Type II Simulator   means a replica of the control equipment for a locomotive that:

(1) Functions in response to a person's manipulation and causes the gauges associated with such controls to appropriately respond to the consequences of that manipulation;

(2) Pictorially, audibly, and graphically illustrates the route to be taken;

(3) Graphically and audibly illustrates the consequences of control manipulations in terms of their effect on train speed braking capacity, and in-train force levels throughout the train; and

(4) Is computer enhanced so that it can be programmed for specific train consists and the known physical characteristics of the line illustrated.

Type III Simulator   means a replica of the control equipment for a locomotive that:

(1) Functions in response to a person's manipulation and causes the gauges associated with such controls to appropriately respond to the consequences of that manipulation;

(2) Graphically illustrates the route to be taken;

(3) Graphically illustrates the consequences of control manipulations in terms of their effect on train speed braking capacity, and in-train force levels throughout the train; and

(4) Is computer enhanced so that it can be programmed for specific train consists and the known physical characteristics of the line illustrated.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 58 FR 19002, Apr. 9, 1993; 60 FR 53136, Oct. 12, 1995; 64 FR 60989, Nov. 8, 1999; 65 FR 58483, Sept. 29, 2000; 67 FR 24, Jan. 2, 2002; 74 FR 68182, Dec. 23, 2009; 85 FR 81307, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.9 Waivers.

(a) A person subject to a requirement of this part may petition the Administrator for a waiver of compliance with such requirement. The filing of such a petition does not affect that person's responsibility for compliance with that requirement while the petition is being considered.

(b) Each petition for a waiver under this section must be filed in the manner and contain the information required by part 211 of this chapter.

(c) If the Administrator finds that a waiver of compliance is in the public interest and is consistent with railroad safety, the Administrator may grant the waiver subject to any conditions the Administrator deems necessary.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 64 FR 60989, Nov. 8, 1999]

§ 240.11 Penalties and consequences for noncompliance.

(a) A person who violates any requirement of this part or causes the violation of any such requirement is subject to a civil penalty of at least $1,086 and not more than $35,516 per violation, except that: Penalties may be assessed against individuals only for willful violations, and, where a grossly negligent violation or a pattern of repeated violations has created an imminent hazard of death or injury to persons, or has caused death or injury, a penalty not to exceed $142,063 per violation may be assessed. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. See FRA's website at www.fra.dot.gov for a statement of agency civil penalty policy.

(b) A person who violates any requirement of this part or causes the violation of any such requirement may be subject to disqualification from all safety-sensitive service in accordance with part 209 of this chapter.

(c) A person who knowingly and willfully falsifies a record or report required by this part may be subject to criminal penalties under 49 U.S.C. 21311.

(d) In addition to the enforcement methods referred to in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section, FRA may also address violations of this part by use of the emergency order, compliance order, and/or injunctive provisions of the Federal rail safety laws.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991]

Editorial Note

Editorial Note:

For Federal Register citations affecting § 240.11, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the Finding Aids section of the printed volume and at www.govinfo.gov.

§ 240.13 Information collection requirements.

(a) The information collection requirements of this part were reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget pursuant to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.) and are assigned OMB control number 2130-0533.

(b) The information collection requirements are found in the following sections: §§ 240.101, 240.103, 240.105, 240.107, 240.109, 240.111, 240.113, 240.115, 240.117, 240.119, 240.121, 240.123, 240.125, 240.127, 240.129, 240.201, 240.205, 240.207, 240.209, 240.211, 240.213, 240.215, 240.219, 240.221, 240.223, 240.227, 240.229, 240.301, 240.303, 240.305, 240.307, 240.309, 240.401, 240.403, 240.405, 240.407, 240.411.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 58 FR 19003, Apr. 9, 1993]

Subpart B—Component Elements of the Certification Process

§ 240.101 Certification program required.

(a) Each railroad subject to this part shall have in effect a written program for certifying the qualifications of locomotive engineers.

(b) Each railroad shall have such a program in effect prior to commencing operations.

(c) Each railroad shall have a certification program approved in accordance with § 240.103 that includes:

(1) A procedure for designating any person it determines to be qualified as a supervisor of locomotive engineers that complies with the criteria established in § 240.105;

(2) A designation of the classes of service that it determines will be used in compliance with the criteria established in § 240.107;

(3) A procedure for evaluating prior safety conduct that complies with the criteria established in § 240.109;

(4) A procedure for evaluating visual and hearing acuity that complies with the criteria established in § 240.121;

(5) A procedure for training that complies with the criteria established in § 240.123;

(6) A procedure for knowledge testing that complies with the criteria established in § 240.125;

(7) A procedure for skill performance testing that complies with the criteria established in § 240.127; and

(8) A procedure for monitoring operational performance that complies with the criteria established in § 240.129.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 74 FR 68182, Dec. 23, 2009]

§ 240.103 Approval of design of individual railroad programs by FRA.

(a) Each railroad shall submit its written certification program and a description of how its program conforms to the specific requirements of this part in accordance with the procedures contained in appendix B to this part and shall submit this written certification program for approval at least 60 days before commencing operations. The primary method for a railroad's submission is by email to FRAOPCERTPROG@dot.gov. For those railroads that are unable to send the program by email, the program may be sent to the Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety/Chief Safety Officer, Federal Railroad Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE, Washington, DC 20590.

(b) Each railroad shall:

(1) Simultaneous with its filing with FRA, provide a copy of the submission filed pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, a resubmission filed pursuant to paragraph (f) of this section, or a material modification filed pursuant to paragraph (g) of this section to the president of each labor organization that represents the railroad's employees subject to this part; and

(2) Include in its submission filed pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, a resubmission filed pursuant to paragraph (f) of this section, or a material modification filed pursuant to paragraph (g) of this section a statement affirming that the railroad has provided a copy to the president of each labor organization that represents the railroad's employees subject to this part, together with a list of the names and addresses of persons provided a copy.

(c) Not later than 45 days from the date of filing a submission pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, a resubmission pursuant to paragraph (f) of this section, or a material modification pursuant to paragraph (g) of this section, any designated representative of railroad employees subject to this part may comment on the submission, resubmission, or material modification.

(1) Each comment shall set forth specifically the basis upon which it is made, and contain a concise statement of the interest of the commenter in the proceeding;

(2) Each comment shall be submitted by email to FRAOPCERTPROG@dot.gov or by mail to the Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety/Chief Safety Officer, FRA, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE, Washington, DC 20590; and

(3) The commenter shall affirm that a copy of the comment was provided to the railroad.

(d) The submission required by paragraph (a) of this section shall state the railroad's election either:

(1) To accept responsibility for the training of student engineers and thereby obtain authority for that railroad to certify initially a person as an engineer in an appropriate class of service, or

(2) To recertify only engineers previously certified by other railroads.

(e) A railroad that elects to accept responsibility for the training of student engineers shall state in its submission whether it will conduct the training program or employ a training program conducted by some other entity on its behalf but adopted and ratified by that railroad.

(f) A railroad's program is considered approved and may be implemented 30 days after the required filing date (or the actual filing date) unless the Administrator notifies the railroad in writing that the program does not conform to the criteria set forth in this part.

(1) If the Administrator determines that the program does not conform, the Administrator will inform the railroad of the specific deficiencies.

(2) If the Administrator informs the railroad of deficiencies more than 30 days after the initial filing date, the original program may remain in effect until 30 days after approval of the revised program is received so long as the railroad has complied with the requirements of paragraph (g) of this section.

(g) A railroad shall resubmit its program within 30 days after the date of such notice of deficiencies. A failure to resubmit the program with the necessary revisions will be considered a failure to implement a program under this part.

(1) The Administrator will inform the railroad in writing whether its revised program conforms to this part.

(2) If the program does not conform, the railroad shall resubmit its program.

(h) A railroad that intends to modify materially its program after receiving initial FRA approval shall submit a description of how it intends to modify the program in conformity with the specific requirements of this part at least 60 days prior to implementing such a change.

(1) A modification is material if it would affect the program's conformance with this part.

(2) The modification submission shall contain a description that conforms to the pertinent portion of the procedures contained in appendix B of this part.

(3) The modification submission will be handled in accordance with the procedures of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section as though it were a new program.

[85 FR 81309, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.104 Criteria for determining whether movement of roadway maintenance equipment or a dual purpose vehicle requires a certified locomotive engineer.

(a) A railroad is not required to use a certified locomotive engineer to perform the following functions:

(1) Operate specialized roadway maintenance equipment; or

(2) Operate a dual purpose vehicle that is:

(i) Being operated in conjunction with roadway maintenance and related maintenance of way functions, including traveling to and from the work site;

(ii) Moving under authority of railroad operating rules designated for the movement of roadway maintenance equipment that ensure the protection of such equipment from train movements; and

(iii) Being operated by an individual trained and qualified in accordance with §§ 214.341, 214.343, and 214.355 of this chapter.

(b) A railroad is required to use a certified locomotive engineer when operating a dual purpose vehicle other than in accordance with paragraph (a)(2) of this section.

[64 FR 60990, Nov. 8, 1999]

§ 240.105 Criteria for selection of designated supervisors of locomotive engineers.

(a) Each railroad's program shall include criteria and procedures for implementing this section.

(b) The railroad shall examine any person it is considering for qualification as a supervisor of locomotive engineers to determine that he or she:

(1) Knows and understands the requirements of this part;

(2) Can appropriately test and evaluate the knowledge and skills of locomotive engineers;

(3) Has the necessary supervisory experience to prescribe appropriate remedial action for any noted deficiencies in the training, knowledge or skills of a person seeking to obtain or retain certification; and

(4) Is a certified engineer who is qualified on the physical characteristics of the portion of the railroad on which that person will perform the duties of a Designated Supervisor of Locomotive Engineers.

(c) If a railroad does not have any Designated Supervisors of Locomotive Engineers, and wishes to hire one, the chief operating officer of the railroad shall make a determination in writing that the Designated Supervisor of Locomotive Engineers designate possesses the necessary performance skills in accordance with § 240.127. This determination shall take into account any special operating characteristics which are unique to that railroad.

(d) Each railroad is authorized to designate a person as a designated supervisor of locomotive engineers with additional conditions or operational restrictions on the service the person may perform.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 64 FR 60990, Nov. 8, 1999; 85 FR 81309, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.107 Types of service.

(a) Each railroad's program shall state which of the three classes of service, provided for in paragraph (b) of this section, that it will cover.

(b) A railroad may issue certificates for any or all of the following classes of service:

(1) Train service engineers,

(2) Locomotive servicing engineers, and

(3) Student engineers.

(c) The following operational constraints apply to each class of service:

(1) Train service engineers may operate locomotives singly or in multiples and may move them with or without cars coupled to them;

(2) Locomotive servicing engineers may operate locomotives singly or in multiples but may not move them with cars coupled to them; and

(3) Student engineers may operate only under direct and immediate supervision of an instructor engineer.

(d) Each railroad is authorized to impose additional conditions or operational restrictions on the service an engineer may perform beyond those identified in this section provided those conditions or restrictions are not inconsistent with this part.

(e) A railroad shall not reclassify the certification of any type of certified engineer to a more restrictive class of certificate or a student engineer certificate during the period in which the certification is otherwise valid.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 74 FR 68182, Dec. 23, 2009; 85 FR 81309, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.109 General criteria for eligibility based on prior safety conduct.

(a) Each railroad's program shall include criteria and procedures to implement this section.

(b) A railroad shall evaluate the prior safety conduct of any person it is considering for qualification as a locomotive engineer and the program shall require that a person is ineligible if the person has an adverse record of prior safety conduct as provided for in § 240.115, § 240.117, or § 240.119.

(c) The program shall require evaluation of data which reflect the person's prior safety conduct as a railroad employee and the person's prior safety conduct as an operator of a motor vehicle, provided that there is relevant prior conduct. The information to be evaluated shall include:

(1) The relevant data furnished from the evaluating railroad's own records, if the person was previously an employee of that railroad;

(2) The relevant data furnished by any other railroad formerly employing the person; and

(3) The relevant data furnished by any governmental agency with pertinent motor vehicle driving records.

(d) The railroad's process for evaluating information concerning prior safety conduct shall be designed to conform wherever necessary with the procedural requirements of §§ 240.111, 240.113, 240.115, 240.117, 240.119, and 240.217.

(e) When evaluating a person's motor vehicle driving record or a person's railroad employment record, a railroad shall not consider information concerning motor vehicle driving incidents or prior railroad safety conduct that occurred at a time other than that specifically provided for in § 240.115, § 240.117 or § 240.119 of this subpart.

(f) A railroad's program shall provide a candidate for certification or recertification a reasonable opportunity to review and comment in writing on any record which contains information concerning the person's prior safety conduct, including information pertinent to determinations required under § 240.119 of this subpart, if the railroad believes the record contains information that could be sufficient to render the person ineligible for certification under this subpart.

(g) The opportunity for comment shall be afforded to the person prior to the railroad's rendering its eligibility decision based on that information. Any responsive comment furnished shall be retained by the railroad in accordance with § 240.215 of this part.

(h) The program shall include a method for a person to advise the railroad that he or she has never been a railroad employee or obtained a license to drive a motor vehicle. Nothing in this section shall be construed as imposing a duty or requirement that a person have prior railroad employment experience or obtain a motor vehicle driver's license in order to become a certified locomotive engineer.

(i) Nothing in this section, § 240.111, or § 240.113 shall be construed to prevent persons subject to this part from entering into an agreement that results in a railroad's obtaining the information needed for compliance with this subpart in a different manner than that prescribed in § 240.111 or § 240.113.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 74 FR 68182, Dec. 23, 2009]

§ 240.111 Individual's duty to furnish data on prior safety conduct as motor vehicle operator.

(a) Except for persons covered by § 240.109(h), each person seeking certification or recertification under this part shall, within 366 days preceding the date of the railroad's decision on certification or recertification:

(1) Take the actions required by paragraphs (b) through (f) or paragraph (g) of this section to make information concerning his or her driving record available to the railroad that is considering such certification or recertification; and

(2) Take any additional actions, including providing any necessary consent required by State, Federal, or foreign law to make information concerning his or her driving record available to that railroad.

(b) Each person seeking certification or recertification under this part shall:

(1) Request, in writing, that the chief of each driver licensing agency identified in paragraph (c) of this section provide a copy of that agency's available information concerning his or her driving record to the railroad that is considering such certification or recertification; and

(2) Request, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (d) or (e) of this section, that a check of the National Driver Register be performed to identify additional information concerning his or her driving record and that any resulting information be provided to that railroad.

(c) Each person shall request the information required under paragraph (b)(1) of this section from:

(1) The chief of the driver licensing agency of any jurisdiction, including a State or foreign country, which last issued that person a driver's license; and

(2) The chief of the driver licensing agency of any other jurisdiction, including states or foreign countries, that issued or reissued him or her a driver's license within the preceding five years.

(d) Each person shall request the information required under paragraph (b)(2) of this section from the Chief, National Driver Register, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE, Washington, DC 20590 in accordance with the procedures contained in appendix C of this part unless the person's motor vehicle driving license was issued by a State or the District of Columbia.

(e) If the person's motor vehicle driving license was issued by one of the driver licensing agencies of a State or the District of Columbia, the person shall request the chief of that driver licensing agency to perform a check of the National Driver Register for the possible existence of additional information concerning his or her driving record and to provide the resulting information to the railroad.

(f) If advised by the railroad that a driver licensing agency or the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration has informed the railroad that additional information concerning that person's driving history may exist in the files of a State agency or foreign country not previously contacted in accordance with this section, such person shall:

(1) Request in writing that the chief of the driver licensing agency which compiled the information provide a copy of the available information to the prospective certifying railroad; and

(2) Take any additional action required by State, Federal, or foreign law to obtain that additional information.

(g) Any person who has never obtained a motor vehicle driving license is not required to comply with the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section but shall notify the railroad of that fact in accordance with procedures of the railroad that comply with § 240.109(d).

(h) Each certified locomotive engineer or person seeking initial certification shall report motor vehicle incidents described in § 240.115(h)(1) and (2) to the employing railroad within 48 hours of being convicted for, or completed State action to cancel, revoke, suspend, or deny a motor vehicle driver's license for, such violations. For purposes of this paragraph (h) and § 240.115(h), “State action” means action of the jurisdiction that has issued the motor vehicle driver's license, including a foreign country. For the purposes of engineer certification, no railroad shall require reporting earlier than 48 hours after the conviction, or completed State action to cancel, revoke, or deny a motor vehicle driver's license.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 64 FR 60990, Nov. 8, 1999; 74 FR 25175, May 27, 2009; 74 FR 68182, Dec. 23, 2009; 85 FR 81309, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.113 Individual's duty to furnish data on prior safety conduct as an employee of a different railroad.

(a) Except for persons covered by § 240.109(h), each person seeking certification or recertification under this part shall, within 366 days preceding the date of the railroad's decision on certification or recertification:

(1) Request, in writing, that the chief operating officer or other appropriate person of the former employing railroad provide a copy of that railroad's available information concerning his or her service record pertaining to compliance or non-compliance with §§ 240.111, 240.117, and 240.119 to the railroad that is considering such certification or recertification; and

(2) Take any additional actions, including providing any necessary consent required by State or Federal law to make information concerning his or her service record available to that railroad.

(b) [Reserved]

[85 FR 81310, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.115 Criteria for consideration of prior safety conduct as a motor vehicle operator.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with a program meeting the requirements of this section. When any person (including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee) violates any requirement of a program that complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) Except as provided in paragraphs (c) through (f) of this section, each railroad, prior to initially certifying or recertifying any person as a locomotive engineer for any type of service, shall determine that the person meets the eligibility requirements of this section involving prior conduct as a motor vehicle operator.

(c) A railroad shall initially certify a person as a locomotive engineer for 60 days if the person:

(1) Requested the information required by paragraph (h) of this section at least 60 days prior to the date of the decision to certify that person; and

(2) Otherwise meets the eligibility requirements provided in § 240.109.

(d) A railroad shall recertify a person as a locomotive engineer for 60 days from the expiration date of that person's certification if the person:

(1) Requested the information required by paragraph (h) of this section at least 60 days prior to the date of the decision to recertify that person; and

(2) Otherwise meets the eligibility requirements provided in § 240.109.

(e) Except as provided in paragraph (f) of this section, if a railroad which certified or recertified a person pursuant to paragraph (c) or (d) of this section does not obtain and evaluate the information required pursuant to paragraph (h) of this section within 60 days of the pertinent dates identified in paragraph (c) or (d) of this section, that person will be ineligible to perform as a locomotive engineer until the information can be evaluated.

(f) If a person requests the information required pursuant to paragraph (h) of this section but is unable to obtain it, that person or the railroad certifying or recertifying that person may petition for a waiver of the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section in accordance with the provisions of part 211 of this chapter. A railroad shall certify or recertify a person during the pendency of the waiver request if the person otherwise meets the eligibility requirements provided in § 240.109.

(g) When evaluating a person's motor vehicle driving record, a railroad shall not consider information concerning motor vehicle driving incidents that occurred more than 36 months before the month in which the railroad is making its certification decision or at a time other than that specifically provided for in § 240.111, § 240.117, § 240.119, or § 240.205.

(h) A railroad shall only consider information concerning the following types of motor vehicle incidents:

(1) A conviction for, or completed State action to cancel, revoke, suspend, or deny a motor vehicle driver's license for, operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of or impaired by alcohol or a controlled substance; or

(2) A conviction for, or completed State action to cancel, revoke, suspend, or deny a motor vehicle driver's license for, refusal to undergo such testing as is required by State or foreign law when a law enforcement official seeks to determine whether a person is operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance.

(i) If such an incident is identified:

(1) The railroad shall provide the data to the railroad's DAC, together with any information concerning the person's railroad service record, and shall refer the person for evaluation to determine if the person has an active substance abuse disorder;

(2) The person shall cooperate in the evaluation and shall provide any requested records of prior counseling or treatment for review exclusively by the DAC in the context of such evaluation; and

(3) If the person is evaluated as not currently affected by an active substance abuse disorder, the subject data shall not be considered further with respect to certification. However, the railroad shall, on recommendation of the DAC, condition certification upon participation in any needed aftercare and/or follow-up testing for alcohol or drugs deemed necessary by the DAC consistent with the technical standards specified in § 240.119(d)(3).

(4) If the person is evaluated as currently affected by an active substance abuse disorder, the provisions of § 240.119(b) will apply.

(5) If the person fails to comply with the requirements of paragraph (i)(2) of this section, the person shall be ineligible to perform as a locomotive engineer until such time as the person complies with the requirements.

[85 FR 81310, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.117 Criteria for consideration of operating rules compliance data.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with a program which meets the requirements of this section. When any person including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee violates any requirement of a program that complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) A person who has demonstrated a failure to comply, as described in paragraph (e) of this section, with railroad rules and practices for the safe operation of trains shall not be currently certified as a locomotive engineer.

(c) (1) A certified locomotive engineer who has demonstrated a failure to comply with railroad rules and practices described in paragraph (e) of this section shall have his or her certification revoked.

(2) A Designated Supervisor of Locomotive Engineers, a certified locomotive engineer pilot or an instructor engineer who is monitoring, piloting or instructing a locomotive engineer and fails to take appropriate action to prevent a violation of paragraph (e) of this section, shall have his or her certification revoked. Appropriate action does not mean that a supervisor, pilot or instructor must prevent a violation from occurring at all costs; the duty may be met by warning an engineer of a potential or foreseeable violation. A Designated Supervisor of Locomotive Engineers will not be held culpable under this section when this monitoring event is conducted as part of the railroad's operational compliance tests as defined in §§ 217.9 and 240.303 of this chapter.

(3) A certified locomotive engineer who is called by a railroad to perform the duty of a train crew member other than that of locomotive engineer or conductor shall not have his or her certification revoked based on actions taken or not taken while performing that duty.

(d) In determining whether a person may be or remain certified as a locomotive engineer, a railroad shall consider as operating rule compliance data only conduct described in paragraphs (e)(1) through (5) of this section that occurred within a period of 36 consecutive months prior to the determination. A review of an existing certification shall be initiated promptly upon the occurrence and documentation of any conduct described in this section.

(e) A railroad shall only consider violations of its operating rules and practices that involve:

(1) Failure to control a locomotive or train in accordance with a signal indication, excluding a hand or a radio signal indication or a switch, that requires a complete stop before passing it;

(2) Failure to adhere to limitations concerning train speed when the speed at which the train was operated exceeds the maximum authorized limit by at least 10 miles per hour. Where restricted speed is in effect, railroads shall consider only those violations of the conditional clause of restricted speed rules (i.e., the clause that requires stopping within one half of the locomotive engineer's range of vision), or the operational equivalent thereof, which cause reportable accidents or incidents under part 225 of this chapter, except for accidents and incidents that are classified as “covered data” under § 225.5 of this chapter (i.e., employee injury/illness cases reportable exclusively because a physician or other licensed health care professional either made a one-time topical application of a prescription-strength medication to the employee's injury or made a written recommendation that the employee: Take one or more days away from work when the employee instead reports to work (or would have reported had he or she been scheduled) and takes no days away from work in connection with the injury or illness; work restricted duty for one or more days when the employee instead works unrestricted (or would have worked unrestricted had he or she been scheduled) and takes no other days of restricted work activity in connection with the injury or illness; or take over-the-counter medication at a dosage equal to or greater than the minimum prescription strength, whether or not the employee actually takes the medication, as instances of failure to adhere to this section;

(3) Failure to adhere to procedures for the safe use of train or engine brakes when the procedures are required for compliance with the Class I, Class IA, Class II, Class III, or transfer train brake test provisions of 49 CFR part 232 or when the procedures are required for compliance with the Class I, Class IA, Class II, or running brake test provisions of 49 CFR part 238;

(4) Occupying main track or a segment of main track without proper authority or permission;

(5) Failure to comply with prohibitions against tampering with locomotive mounted safety devices, or knowingly operating or permitting to be operated a train with an unauthorized disabled safety device in the controlling locomotive. (See 49 CFR part 218, subpart D, and appendix C to part 218); or

(6) Incidents of noncompliance with § 219.101 of this chapter; however, such incidents shall be considered as a violation only for the purposes of paragraphs (g)(2) and (3) of this section.

(f) (1) If in any single incident the person's conduct contravened more than one operating rule or practice, that event shall be treated as a single violation for the purposes of this section.

(2) A violation of one or more operating rules or practices described in paragraph (e)(1) through (e)(5) of this section that occurs during a properly conducted operational compliance test subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be counted in determining the periods of ineligibility described in paragraph (g) of this section.

(3) An operational test that is not conducted in compliance with this part, a railroad's operating rules, or a railroad's program under § 217.9 of this chapter, will not be considered a legitimate test of operational skill or knowledge, and will not be considered for certification, recertification or revocation purposes.

(4) A railroad shall not be permitted to deny or revoke an employee's certification based upon additional conditions or operational restrictions imposed pursuant to § 240.107(d).

(g) A period of ineligibility described in this paragraph shall:

(1) Begin, for a person not currently certified, on the date of the railroad's written determination that the most recent incident has occurred; or

(2) Begin, for a person currently certified, on the date of the railroad's notification to the person that recertification has been denied or certification has been revoked; and

(3) Be determined according to the following standards:

(i) In the case of a single incident involving violation of one or more of the operating rules or practices described in paragraphs (e)(1) through (5) of this section, the person shall have his or her certificate revoked for a period of 30 calendar days.

(ii) In the case of two separate incidents involving a violation of one or more of the operating rules or practices described in paragraphs (e)(1) through (5) of this section, that occurred within 24 months of each other, the person shall have his or her certificate revoked for a period of 180 calendar days.

(iii) In the case of three separate incidents involving violations of one or more of the operating rules or practices, described in paragraphs (e)(1) through (e)(6) of this section, that occurred within 36 months of each other, the person shall have his or her certificate revoked for a period of one year.

(iv) In the case of four separate incidents involving violations of one or more of the operating rules or practices, described in paragraphs (e)(1) through (e)(6) of this section, that occurred within 36 months of each other, the person shall have his or her certificate revoked for a period of three years.

(v) Where, based on the occurrence of violations described in paragraph (e)(6) of this section, different periods of ineligibility may result under the provisions of this section and § 240.119, the longest period of revocation shall control.

(h) Any or all periods of revocation provided in this section may consist of training.

(i) Future eligibility to hold certificate. A person whose certification has been denied or revoked shall be eligible for grant or reinstatement of the certificate prior to the expiration of the initial period of revocation only if:

(1) The denial or revocation of certification in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (g)(3) of this section is for a period of one year or less;

(2) Certification was denied or revoked for reasons other than noncompliance with § 219.101 of this chapter;

(3) The person has been evaluated by a Designated Supervisor of Locomotive Engineers and determined to have received adequate remedial training;

(4) The person has successfully completed any mandatory program of training or retraining, if that was determined to be necessary by the railroad prior to return to service; and

(5) At least one half the pertinent period of ineligibility specified in paragraph (g)(3) of this section has elapsed.

[64 FR 60990, Nov. 8, 1999, as amended at 68 FR 10139, Mar. 3, 2003; 74 FR 68182, Dec. 23, 2009; 85 FR 81311, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.119 Criteria for consideration of data on substance abuse disorders and alcohol/drug rules compliance.

(a) Program requirement.  Each railroad shall adopt and comply with a program which complies with the requirements of this section. When any person, including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee, violates any requirement of a program which complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) Determination requirement.  Each railroad, prior to initially certifying or recertifying any person as a locomotive engineer for any type of service, shall determine that the person meets the eligibility requirements of this section.

(c) Recordkeeping requirement.  In order to make the determination required under paragraph (d) of this section, a railroad shall have on file documents pertinent to that determination, including a written document from its DAC which states his or her professional opinion that the person has been evaluated as not currently affected by a substance abuse disorder or that the person has been evaluated as affected by an active substance abuse disorder.

(d) Fitness requirement. (1) A person who has an active substance abuse disorder shall be denied certification or recertification as a locomotive engineer.

(2) Except as provided in paragraph (g) of this section, a certified locomotive engineer who is determined to have an active substance abuse disorder shall be ineligible to hold certification. Consistent with other provisions of this part, certification may be reinstated as provided in paragraph (f) of this section.

(3) In the case of a current employee of the railroad evaluated as having an active substance abuse disorder (including a person identified under the procedures of § 240.115), the employee may, if otherwise eligible, voluntarily self-refer for substance abuse counseling or treatment under the policy required by § 219.1001(b)(1) of this chapter; and the railroad shall then treat the substance abuse evaluation as confidential except with respect to ineligibility for certification.

(e) Prior alcohol/drug conduct; Federal rule compliance. (1) In determining whether a person may be or remain certified as a locomotive engineer, a railroad shall consider conduct described in paragraph (e)(2) of this section that occurred within a period of 60 consecutive months prior to the review. A review of certification shall be initiated promptly upon the occurrence and documentation of any incident of conduct described in this paragraph (e)(1).

(2) A railroad shall consider any violation of § 219.101 or § 219.102 of this chapter and any refusal to provide a breath or body fluid sample for testing under the requirements of part 219 of this chapter when instructed to do so by a railroad representative.

(3) A period of ineligibility described in this paragraph (e) shall begin:

(i) For a person not currently certified, on the date of the railroad's written determination that the most recent incident has occurred; or

(ii) For a person currently certified, on the date of the railroad's notification to the person that recertification has been denied or certification has been revoked.

(4) The period of ineligibility described in this section shall be determined in accordance with the following standards:

(i) In the case of a single violation of § 219.102 of this chapter, the person shall be ineligible to hold a certificate during evaluation and any required primary treatment as described in paragraph (f) of this section. In the case of two violations of § 219.102 of this chapter, the person shall be ineligible to hold a certificate for a period of two years. In the case of more than two such violations, the person shall be ineligible to hold a certificate for a period of five years.

(ii) In the case of one violation of § 219.102 of this chapter and one violation of § 219.101 of this chapter, the person shall be ineligible to hold a certificate for a period of three years.

(iii) In the case of one violation of § 219.101 of this chapter, the person shall be ineligible to hold a certificate for a period of 9 months (unless identification of the violation was through a qualifying referral program described in § 219.1001 of this chapter and the locomotive engineer waives investigation, in which case the certificate shall be deemed suspended during evaluation and any required primary treatment as described in paragraph (f) of this section). In the case of two or more violations of § 219.101 of this chapter, the person shall be ineligible to hold a certificate for a period of five years.

(iv) A refusal to provide a breath or body fluid sample for testing under the requirements of part 219 of this chapter when instructed to do so by a railroad representative shall be treated, for purposes of ineligibility under this paragraph (e), in the same manner as a violation of:

(A) Section 219.102 of this chapter, in the case of a refusal to provide a body fluid specimen for testing; or

(B) Section 219.101 of this chapter, in the case of a refusal to provide a breath sample for alcohol testing or a blood specimen for mandatory post-accident toxicological testing.

(f) Future eligibility to hold certificate following alcohol/drug violation.  The following requirements apply to a person who has been denied certification or who has had certification suspended or revoked as a result of conduct described in paragraph (e) of this section:

(1) The person shall not be eligible for grant or reinstatement of the certificate unless and until the person has:

(i) Been evaluated by a SAP to determine if the person currently has an active substance abuse disorder;

(ii) Successfully completed any program of counseling or treatment determined to be necessary by the SAP prior to return to service; and

(iii) In accordance with the testing procedures of subpart H of part 219 of this chapter, has had an alcohol test with an alcohol concentration of less than .02 and presented a body fluid sample that tested negative for controlled substances assayed.

(2) A locomotive engineer placed in service or returned to service under the above-stated conditions shall continue in any program of counseling or treatment deemed necessary by the SAP and shall be subject to a reasonable program of follow-up alcohol and drug testing without prior notice for a period of not more than 60 months following return to service. Follow-up tests shall include not fewer than 6 alcohol tests and 6 drug tests during the first 12 months following return to service.

(3) Return-to-service and follow-up alcohol and drug tests shall be performed consistent with the requirements of subpart H of part 219 of this chapter.

(4) This paragraph (f) does not create an entitlement to utilize the services of a railroad SAP, to be afforded leave from employment for counseling or treatment, or to employment as a locomotive engineer. Nor does it restrict any discretion available to the railroad to take disciplinary action based on conduct described herein.

(g) Confidentiality protected.  Nothing in this part shall affect the responsibility of the railroad under § 219.1003(f) of this chapter to treat qualified referrals for substance abuse counseling and treatment as confidential; and the certification status of a locomotive engineer who is successfully assisted under the procedures of that section shall not be adversely affected. However, the railroad shall include in its referral policy, as required pursuant to § 219.1003(j) of this chapter, a provision that, at least with respect to a certified locomotive engineer or a candidate for certification, the policy of confidentiality is waived (to the extent that the railroad shall receive from the SAP or DAC official notice of the substance abuse disorder and shall suspend or revoke the certification, as appropriate) if the person at any time refuses to cooperate in a recommended course of counseling or treatment.

[85 FR 81311, Dec. 15, 2020, as amended at 88 FR 27652, May 2, 2023]

§ 240.121 Criteria for vision and hearing acuity data.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with a program which complies with the requirements of this section. When any person, including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee, violates any requirement of a program that complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) In order to be currently certified as a locomotive engineer, except as permitted by paragraph (e) of this section, a person's vision and hearing shall meet or exceed the standards prescribed in this section and appendix F to this part. It is recommended that each test conducted pursuant to this section should be performed according to any directions supplied by the manufacturer of such test and any American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards that are applicable.

(c) Except as provided in paragraph (e), each person shall have visual acuity that meets or exceeds the following thresholds:

(1) For distant viewing either

(i) Distant visual acuity of at least 20/40 (Snellen) in each eye without corrective lenses or

(ii) Distant visual acuity separately corrected to at least 20/40 (Snellen) with corrective lenses and distant binocular acuity of at least 20/40 (Snellen) in both eyes with or without corrective lenses;

(2) A field of vision of at least 70 degrees in the horizontal meridian in each eye; and

(3) The ability to recognize and distinguish between the colors of railroad signals as demonstrated by successfully completing one of the tests in appendix F to this part.

(d) Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, each person shall have a hearing test or audiogram that shows the person's hearing acuity meets or exceeds the following thresholds: The person does not have an average hearing loss in the better ear greater than 40 decibels with or without use of a hearing aid, at 500 Hz, 1,000 Hz, and 2,000 Hz. The hearing test or audiogram shall meet the requirements of one of the following:

(1) As required in 29 CFR 1910.95(h) (Occupational Safety and Health Administration);

(2) As required in § 227.111 of this chapter; or

(3) Conducted using an audiometer that meets the specifications of and is maintained and used in accordance with a formal industry standard, such as ANSI S3.6, “Specifications for Audiometers.”

(e) A person not meeting the thresholds in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section shall, upon request, be subject to further medical evaluation by a railroad's medical examiner to determine that person's ability to safely operate a locomotive. In accordance with the guidance prescribed in appendix F to this part, a person is entitled to one retest without making any showing and to another retest if the person provides evidence substantiating that circumstances have changed since the last test to the extent that the person could now arguably operate a locomotive or train safely. The railroad shall provide its medical examiner with a copy of this part, including all appendices. If, after consultation with one of the railroad's designated supervisors of locomotive engineers, the medical examiner concludes that, despite not meeting the threshold(s) in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section, the person has the ability to safely operate a locomotive, the person may be certified as a locomotive engineer and such certification conditioned on any special restrictions the medical examiner determines in writing to be necessary.

(f) As a condition of maintaining certification, each certified locomotive engineer shall notify his or her employing railroad's medical department or, if no such department exists, an appropriate railroad official if the person's best correctable vision or hearing has deteriorated to the extent that the person no longer meets one or more of the prescribed vision or hearing standards or requirements of this section. This notification is required prior to any subsequent operation of a locomotive or train which would require a certified locomotive engineer.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 64 FR 60992, Nov. 8, 1999; 85 FR 81312, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.123 Training.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with a program that meets the requirements of this section. When any person, including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee, violates any requirement of a program that complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) A railroad shall provide for the continuing education of certified locomotive engineers to ensure that each engineer maintains the necessary knowledge, skill and ability concerning personal safety, operating rules and practices, mechanical condition of equipment, methods of safe train handling (including familiarity with physical characteristics as determined by a qualified Designated Supervisor of Locomotive Engineers), and relevant Federal safety rules.

(c) A railroad that elects to train a previously untrained person to be a locomotive engineer shall provide initial training that, at a minimum, complies with the program requirements of § 243.101 of this chapter and:

(1) Is composed of classroom, skill performance, and familiarization with physical characteristics components;

(2) Includes both knowledge and performance skill testing;

(3) Is conducted under the supervision of a qualified class instructor;

(4) Is subdivided into segments or periods of appropriate duration to effectively cover the following subject matter areas:

(i) Personal safety;

(ii) Railroad operating rules and procedures;

(iii) Mechanical condition of equipment;

(iv) Train handling procedures (including use of locomotive and train brake systems);

(v) Familiarization with physical characteristics including train handling; and

(vi) Compliance with Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders; and

(5) Is conducted so that the performance skill component shall meet the following conditions:

(i) Be under the supervision of a qualified instructor engineer located in the same control compartment whenever possible;

(ii) Place the student engineer at the controls of a locomotive for a significant portion of the time; and

(iii) Permit the student to experience whatever variety of types of trains are normally operated by the railroad.

(d) Pursuant to paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, a person may acquire familiarity with the physical characteristics of a territory through the following methods if the specific conditions included in the description of each method are met. The methods used by a railroad for familiarizing its engineers with new territory while starting up a new railroad, starting operations over newly acquired rail lines, or reopening of a long unused route, shall be described in the railroad's locomotive engineer qualification program required under this part and submitted according to the procedures described in Appendix B to this part.

(1) If ownership of a railroad is being transferred from one company to another, the engineer(s) of the acquiring company may receive familiarization training from the selling company prior to the acquiring railroad commencing operation; or

(2) Failing to obtain familiarization training from the previous owner, opening a new rail line, or reopening an unused route would require that the engineer(s) obtain familiarization through other methods. Acceptable methods of obtaining familiarization include using hyrail trips or initial lite locomotive trips in compliance with what is specified in the railroad's locomotive engineer qualification program required under this part and submitted according to the procedures described in Appendix B to this part.

(e) A railroad shall designate in its program required by this section the time period in which a locomotive engineer must be absent from a territory or yard, before requalification on physical characteristics is required.

(f) A railroad's program shall include the procedures used to qualify or requalify a person on the physical characteristics.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 64 FR 60992, Nov. 8, 1999; 85 FR 81312, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.125 Knowledge testing.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with a program that meets the requirements of this section. When any person, including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee, violates any requirement of a program that complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) A railroad shall have procedures for testing a person being evaluated for qualification as a locomotive engineer in either train or locomotive service to determine that the person has sufficient knowledge of the railroad's rules and practices for the safe operation of trains.

(c) The testing methods selected by the railroad shall be:

(1) Designed to examine a person's knowledge of the railroad's rules and practices for the safe operation of trains;

(2) Objective in nature;

(3) Administered in written form;

(4) Cover the following subjects:

(i) Personal safety practices;

(ii) Operating practices;

(iii) Equipment inspection practices;

(iv) Train handling practices including familiarity with the physical characteristics of the territory; and

(v) Compliance with Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders;

(5) Sufficient to accurately measure the person's knowledge of the covered subjects; and

(6) Conducted without open reference books or other materials except to the degree the person is being tested on his or her ability to use such reference books or materials.

(d) The conduct of the test shall be documented in writing and the documentation shall contain sufficient information to identify the relevant facts relied on for evaluation purposes.

(e) For purposes of paragraph (c) of this section, the railroad must provide the person(s) being tested with an opportunity to consult with a supervisory employee, who possesses territorial qualifications for the territory, to explain a question.

(f) The documentation shall indicate whether the person passed or failed the test.

(g) If a person fails to pass the test, no railroad shall permit or require that person to function as a locomotive engineer prior to that person's achieving a passing score during a reexamination of the person's knowledge.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 85 FR 81313, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.127 Criteria for examining skill performance.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with a program which complies with the requirements of this section. When any person, including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee, violates any requirement of a program that complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) A railroad shall have procedures for examining the performance skills of a person being evaluated for qualification as a locomotive engineer in either train or locomotive service to determine whether the person has the skills to safely operate locomotives and/or trains, including the proper application of the railroad's rules and practices for the safe operation of locomotives or trains, in the most demanding class or type of service that the person will be permitted to perform.

(c) The testing procedures selected by the railroad shall be:

(1) Designed to examine a person's skills in safely operating locomotives or trains including the proper application of the railroad's rules and practices for the safe operation of locomotives or trains when performing the most demanding class or type of service that the person will be permitted to perform;

(2) Conducted by a Designated Supervisor of Locomotive Engineers, who does not need to be qualified on the physical characteristics of the territory over which the test will be conducted;

(3) Cover the following subjects during the test period

(i) Operating practices;

(ii) Equipment inspection practices;

(iii) Train handling practices; and

(iv) Compliance with Federal safety rules;

(4) Be of sufficient length to effectively evaluate the person's ability to operate trains; and

(5) Conducted when the person either

(i) Is at the controls of the type of train normally operated on that railroad or segment of railroad and which this person might be permitted or required by the railroad to operate in the normal course of events after certification or

(ii) Is at the controls of a Type I or Type II simulator programmed to replicate the responsive behavior of the type of train normally operated on that railroad or segment of railroad and which this person might be permitted or required by the railroad to operate in the normal course of events after certification.

(d) The conduct of the test shall be documented in writing by the designated supervisor and the documentation shall contain:

(1) The relevant facts concerning the train being operated;

(2) The constraints applicable to its operation; and

(3) The factors observed and relied on for evaluation purposes by the designated supervisor.

(e) Each railroad's program shall indicate the types of actions the railroad will take in the event that a person fails an initial examination or a reexamination of his or her performance skills in accordance with the procedures required under § 240.211.

(f) Each railroad's program shall describe the scoring system used by the railroad during a skills test administered in accordance with the procedures required under § 240.211. The description shall include the skills to be tested and the weight or possible score that each skill will be given.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 64 FR 60992, Nov. 8, 1999; 74 FR 68183, Dec. 23, 2009; 85 FR 81313, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.129 Criteria for monitoring operational performance of certified engineers.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with a program which complies with the requirements of this section. When any person, including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee, violates any requirement of a program which complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) Each railroad shall have a program to monitor the operational performance of those it has determined as qualified as a locomotive engineer in any class of service. The program shall include procedures to address the testing of certified engineers who are not given both an operational monitoring observation and an unannounced compliance test in a calendar year pursuant to paragraph (h) of this section. At a minimum, such procedures shall include the following:

(1) A requirement that an operational monitoring observation and an unannounced compliance test must be conducted within 30 days of a return to service as a locomotive engineer; and

(2) The railroad must retain a written record indicating the date that the engineer stopped performing service that requires certification pursuant to this part, the date that the engineer returned to performing service that requires certification pursuant to this part, and the dates that the operational monitoring observation and the unannounced compliance test were performed.

(c) The procedures for the operational monitoring observation shall:

(1) Be designed to determine that the person possesses and routinely employs the skills to safely operate locomotives and/or trains, including the proper application of the railroad's rules and practices for the safe operation of locomotives and trains;

(2) Be designed so that each engineer shall be monitored each calendar year by a Designated Supervisor of Locomotive Engineers, who does not need to be qualified on the physical characteristics of the territory over which the operational monitoring observation will be conducted;

(3) Be designed so that the locomotive engineer is either accompanied by the designated supervisor for a reasonable length of time or has his or her train handling activities electronically recorded by a train operations event recorder;

(d) The operational monitoring observation procedures may be designed so that the locomotive engineer being monitored either:

(i) Is at the controls of the type of train normally operated on that railroad or segment of railroad and which this person might be permitted or required by the railroad to operate in the normal course of events after certification or

(ii) Is at the controls of a Type I or Type II simulator programmed to replicate the responsive behavior of the type of train normally operated on that railroad or segment of railroad and which this person might be permitted or required by the railroad to operate in the normal course of events after certification.

(e) The unannounced compliance test program shall:

(1) Be designed so that, except for as provided in paragraph (h) of this section, each locomotive engineer shall be given at least one unannounced compliance test each calendar year;

(2) Designed to test:

(i) Engineer compliance with provisions of the railroad's operating rules that require response to signals that display less than a “clear” aspect, if the railroad operates with a signal system that must comply with part 236 of this chapter;

(ii) Engineer compliance with provisions of the railroad's operating rules, timetable or other mandatory directives that require affirmative response by the locomotive engineer to less favorable conditions than that which existed prior to initiation of the test; or

(iii) Engineer compliance with provisions of the railroad's operating rules, timetable or other mandatory directives violation of which by engineers were cited by the railroad as the cause of train accidents or train incidents in accident reports filed in compliance with part 225 of this chapter in the preceding calendar year;

(3) Designed so that the administration of these tests is effectively distributed throughout whatever portion of a 24-hour day that the railroad conducts its operations; and

(4) Designed so that individual tests are administered without prior notice to the engineer being tested.

(f) Each railroad's program shall indicate the types of actions the railroad will take in the event that it finds deficiencies with a locomotive engineer's performance during an operational monitoring observation or unannounced compliance test administered in accordance with the procedures required under § 240.303.

(g) Each railroad's program shall describe the scoring system used by the railroad during an operational monitoring observation or unannounced compliance test administered in accordance with the procedures required under § 240.303.

(h) A certified engineer who is not performing a service that requires certification pursuant to this part need not be given an unannounced compliance test or operational monitoring observation. However, when the certified engineer returns to a service that requires certification pursuant to this part, that certified engineer must be tested pursuant to this section and § 240.303 within 30 days of his or her return.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 64 FR 60992, Nov. 8, 1999; 74 FR 68183, Dec. 23, 2009; 85 FR 81313, Dec. 15, 2020]

Subpart C—Implementation of the Certification Process

§ 240.201 Implementation.

(a) Each railroad shall designate in writing any person(s) it deems qualified as a designated supervisor of locomotive engineers. Each person so designated shall have demonstrated to the railroad through training, testing or prior experience that he or she has the knowledge, skills, and ability to be a designated supervisor of locomotive engineers.

(b) Each railroad shall designate in writing all persons that it will deem to be qualified as certified locomotive engineers for the purpose of initial compliance with paragraph (d) of this section, except as provided for in paragraph (h) of this section.

(1) Each person so designated shall have demonstrated to the railroad through training, testing or prior experience that he or she has the knowledge and skills to be a certified locomotive engineer.

(2) Each railroad shall issue a certificate that complies with § 240.223 to each person that it designates as qualified under the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section.

(c) No railroad shall permit or require a person, designated as qualified for certification under the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section, to perform service as a certified locomotive or train service engineer for more than a 36-month period unless that person has been determined to be qualified in accordance with procedures that comply with subpart C.

(d) No railroad shall permit or require any person to operate a locomotive in any class of locomotive or train service unless that person has been certified as a qualified locomotive engineer and issued a certificate that complies with § 240.223.

(e) No Class I railroad (including the National Railroad Passenger Corporation) or railroad providing commuter service shall designate any person it deems qualified as a designated supervisor of locomotive engineers or initially certify or recertify a person as a locomotive engineer in either locomotive or train service unless that person has been tested, evaluated, and determined to be qualified in accordance with procedures that comply with subpart C.

(f) No Class II railroad shall designate any person it deems qualified as a designated supervisor of locomotive engineers or initially certify or recertify a person as a locomotive engineer in any class of locomotive or train service unless that person has been tested, evaluated and determined to be qualified in accordance with procedures that comply with subpart C.

(g) No Class III railroad (including a switching and terminal or other railroad not otherwise classified) shall designate any person it deems qualified as a designated supervisor of locomotive engineers or initially certify or recertify a person as a locomotive engineer in any class of locomotive or train service unless that person has been tested, evaluated and determined to be qualified in accordance with procedures that comply with subpart C.

(h) Each person designated as a locomotive engineer shall be issued a certificate that complies with § 240.223 prior to being required or permitted to operate a locomotive.

[74 FR 68183, Dec. 23, 2009]

§ 240.203 Determinations required as a prerequisite to certification.

(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b), each railroad, prior to initially certifying or recertifying any person as an engineer for any class of service, shall, in accordance with its FRA-approved program determine in writing that:

(1) The individual meets the eligibility requirements of §§ 240.115, 240.117 and 240.119; and

(2) The individual meets the vision and hearing acuity standards of § 240.121;

(3) The individual has the necessary knowledge, as demonstrated by successfully completing a test that meets the requirements of § 240.125;

(4) The individual has the necessary applied knowledge and operating performance skills, as demonstrated by successfully completing an operational performance test that meets the requirements of § 240.127; and

(5) Where a person has not previously been certified, that the person has completed a training program that meets the requirements of § 240.123.

(b) A railroad may certify a person as a student engineer after determining that the person meets the vision and hearing acuity standards of § 240.121. A railroad may subsequently certify that student engineer as either a locomotive servicing engineer or a train service engineer without further review of his or her acuity status provided it determines that:

(1) The person successfully completed a training program that complies with § 240.123;

(2) The person meets the eligibility requirements of §§ 240.109 and 240.119; and

(3) A period of not more than twenty-four months has elapsed since the student engineer certification was issued.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 60 FR 53136, Oct. 12, 1995; 74 FR 68183, Dec. 23, 2009]

§ 240.205 Procedures for determining eligibility based on prior safety conduct.

(a) Each railroad, prior to initially certifying or recertifying any person as an engineer for any class of service other than student, shall determine that the person meets the eligibility requirements of § 240.115 involving prior conduct as a motor vehicle operator, § 240.117 involving prior conduct as a railroad worker, and § 240.119 involving substance abuse disorders and alcohol/drug rules compliance.

(b) In order to make the determination required under paragraph (a) of this section, a railroad shall have on file documents pertinent to the determinations referred to in paragraph (a) of this section, including a written document from its DAC either reflecting his or her professional opinion that the person has been evaluated as not currently affected by a substance abuse disorder or that the person has been evaluated as affected by an active substance abuse disorder and is ineligible for certification.

[85 FR 81314, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.207 Procedures for making the determination on vision and hearing acuity.

(a) Each railroad, prior to initially certifying or recertifying any person as an engineer for any class of service, shall determine that the person meets the standards for visual acuity and hearing acuity prescribed in § 240.121.

(b) In order to make the determination required under paragraph (a), a railroad shall have on file either:

(1) A medical examiner's certificate that the individual has been medically examined and meets these acuity standards; or

(2) A written document from its medical examiner documenting his or her professional opinion that the person does not meet one or both acuity standards and stating the basis for his or her determination that:

(i) The person can nevertheless be certified under certain conditions; or

(ii) The person's acuity is such that he or she cannot safely operate a locomotive even with conditions attached.

(c) Any examination required for compliance with this section shall be performed by or under the supervision of a medical examiner or a licensed physician's assistant such that:

(1) A licensed optometrist or a technician responsible to that person may perform the portion of the examination that pertains to visual acuity; and

(2) A licensed or certified audiologist or a technician responsible to that person may perform the portion of the examination that pertains to hearing acuity.

(d) If the examination required under this section discloses that the person needs corrective lenses or a hearing aid, or both, either to meet the threshold acuity levels established in § 240.121 or to meet a lower threshold determined by the railroad's medical examiner to be sufficient to safely operate a locomotive or train on that railroad, that fact shall be noted on the certificate issued in accordance with the provisions of this part.

(e) Any person with such a certificate notation shall use the relevant corrective device(s) while operating a locomotive in locomotive or train service unless the railroad's medical examiner subsequently determines in writing that the person can safely operate without using the device.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 74 FR 68184, Dec. 23, 2009; 85 FR 81314, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.209 Procedures for making the determination on knowledge.

(a) Each railroad, prior to initially certifying or recertifying any person as an engineer for any class of train or locomotive service, shall determine that the person has, in accordance with the requirements of § 240.125 of this part, demonstrated sufficient knowledge of the railroad's rules and practices for the safe operation of trains.

(b) In order to make the determination required by paragraph (a) of this section, a railroad shall have written documentation showing that the person either:

(1) Exhibited his or her knowledge by achieving a passing grade in testing that complies with this part; or

(2) Did not achieve a passing grade in such testing.

(c) If a person fails to achieve a passing score under the testing procedures required by this part, no railroad shall permit or require that person to operate a locomotive as a locomotive or train service engineer prior to that person's achieving a passing score during a reexamination of his or her knowledge.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 74 FR 68184, Dec. 23, 2009; 85 FR 81314, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.211 Procedures for making the determination on performance skills.

(a) Each railroad, prior to initially certifying or recertifying any person as an engineer for any class of train or locomotive service, shall determine that the person has demonstrated, in accordance with the requirements of § 240.127 of this part, the skills to safely operate locomotives or locomotives and trains, including the proper application of the railroad's rules and practices for the safe operation of locomotives or trains, in the most demanding class or type of service that the person will be permitted to perform.

(b) In order to make this determination, a railroad shall have written documentation showing the person either:

(1) Exhibited his or her knowledge by achieving a passing grade in testing that complies with this part; or

(2) Did not achieve a passing grade in such testing.

(c) If a person fails to achieve a passing score under the testing and evaluation procedures required by this part, no railroad shall permit or require that person to operate a locomotive as a locomotive or train service engineer prior to that person's achieving a passing score during a reexamination of his or her performance skills.

(d) No railroad shall permit a designated supervisor of locomotive engineers to test, examine or evaluate his or her own performance skills when complying with this section.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 74 FR 68184, Dec. 23, 2009; 85 FR 81314, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.213 Procedures for making the determination on completion of training program.

(a) Each railroad, prior to the initial issuance of a certificate to any person as a train or locomotive service engineer, shall determine that the person has, in accordance with the requirements of § 240.123 of this part, the knowledge and skills to safely operate a locomotive or train in the most demanding class or type of service that the person will be permitted to perform.

(b) In making this determination, a railroad shall have written documentation showing that:

(1) The person completed a training program that complies with § 240.123 of this part;

(2) The person demonstrated his or her knowledge and skills by achieving a passing grade under the testing and evaluation procedures of that training program; and

(3) A qualified Designated Supervisor of Locomotive Engineers has determined that the person is familiar with the physical characteristics of the railroad or its pertinent segments.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 64 FR 60992, Nov. 8, 1999; 74 FR 68184, Dec. 23, 2009]

§ 240.215 Retaining information supporting determinations.

(a) A railroad that issues, denies, or revokes a certificate after making the determinations required under § 240.203 shall maintain a record for each certified engineer or applicant for certification that contains the information the railroad relied on in making the determinations.

(b) The information concerning eligibility that the railroad shall retain includes:

(1) Any relevant data from the railroad's records concerning the person's prior safety conduct;

(2) Any relevant data furnished by another railroad;

(3) Any relevant data furnished by a governmental agency concerning the person's motor vehicle driving record; and

(4) Any relevant data furnished by the person seeking certification concerning his or her eligibility.

(c) The information concerning vision and hearing acuity that the railroad shall retain includes:

(1) The relevant test results data concerning acuity; and,

(2) If applicable, the relevant data concerning the professional opinion of the railroad's medical examiner on the adequacy of the person's acuity.

(d) The information concerning demonstrated knowledge that the railroad shall retain includes:

(1) Any relevant data from the railroad's records concerning the person's success or failure of the passage of knowledge test(s); and

(2) A sample copy of the written knowledge test or tests administered.

(e) The information concerning demonstrated performance skills that the railroad shall retain includes:

(1) The relevant data from the railroad's records concerning the person's success or failure on the performance skills test(s) that documents the relevant operating facts on which the evaluation is based including the observations and evaluation of the designated supervisor of locomotive engineers;

(2) If a railroad relies on the use of a locomotive operations simulator to conduct the performance skills testing required under this part, the relevant data from the railroad's records concerning the person's success or failure on the performance skills test(s) that documents the relevant operating facts on which the determination was based including the observations and evaluation of the designated supervisor of locomotive engineers; and

(3) The relevant data from the railroad's records concerning the person's success or failure on tests the railroad performed to monitor the engineer's operating performance in accordance with § 240.129.

(f) If a railroad is relying on successful completion of an approved training program conducted by another entity, the relying railroad shall maintain a record for each certified engineer that contains the relevant data furnished by the training entity concerning the person's demonstration of knowledge and performance skills and relied on by the railroad in making its determinations.

(g) If a railroad is relying on a certification decision initially made by another railroad, the relying railroad shall maintain a record for each certified engineer that contains the relevant data furnished by the other railroad which it relied on in making its determinations.

(h) All records required under this section shall be retained for a period of six years from the date of the certification, recertification, denial or revocation decision and shall be made available to FRA representatives upon request during normal business hours.

(i) It shall be unlawful for any railroad to knowingly or any individual to willfully:

(1) Make, cause to be made, or participate in the making of a false entry on the record(s) required by this section; or

(2) Otherwise falsify such records through material misstatement, omission, or mutilation.

(j) Nothing in this section precludes a railroad from maintaining the information required to be retained under this section in an electronic format provided that:

(1) The railroad maintains an information technology security program adequate to ensure the integrity of the electronic data storage system, including the prevention of unauthorized access to the program logic or individual records;

(2) The program and data storage system must be protected by a security system that utilizes an employee identification number and password, or a comparable method, to establish appropriate levels of program access meeting all of the following standards:

(i) No two individuals have the same electronic identity; and

(ii) A record cannot be deleted or altered by any individual after the record is certified by the employee who created the record;

(3) Any amendment to a record is either:

(i) Electronically stored apart from the record that it amends; or

(ii) Electronically attached to the record as information without changing the original record;

(4) Each amendment to a record uniquely identifies the person making the amendment;

(5) The system employed by the railroad for data storage permits reasonable access and retrieval of the information in usable format when requested to furnish data by FRA representatives; and

(6) Information retrieved from the system can be easily produced in a printed format which can be readily provided to FRA representatives in a timely manner and authenticated by a designated representative of the railroad as a true and accurate copy of the railroad's records if requested to do so by FRA representatives.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 58 FR 19003, Apr. 9, 1993; 74 FR 68184, Dec. 23, 2009; 85 FR 81314, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.217 Time limitations for making determinations.

(a) A railroad shall not certify or recertify a person as a qualified locomotive engineer in any class of train or engine service, if the railroad is making a determination concerning:

(1) Eligibility and the eligibility data being relied on was furnished more than 366 days before the date of the railroad's certification decision;

(2) Visual and hearing acuity and the medical examination being relied on was conducted more than 450 days before the date of the railroad's recertification decision;

(3) Demonstrated knowledge and the knowledge examination being relied on was conducted more than 366 days before the date of the railroad's certification decision;

(4) Demonstrated knowledge and the knowledge examination being relied on was conducted more than 24 months before the date of the railroad's certification decision if the railroad administers a knowledge testing program pursuant to § 240.125 at intervals that do not exceed 24 months; or

(5) Demonstrated performance skills and the performance skill testing being relied on was conducted more than 366 days before the date of the railroad's certification decision.

(b) The time limitations of paragraph (a) of this section do not apply to a railroad that is making a certification decision in reliance on determinations made by another railroad in accordance with paragraph (c)(2) of this section, § 240.227, or § 240.229.

(c) Except as provided in § 240.201 concerning implementation dates for initial certification decisions and paragraph (b) of this section, no railroad shall:

(1) Certify a person as a qualified locomotive engineer for an interval of more than 36 months; or

(2) Rely on a certification issued by another railroad that is more than 36 months old.

(d) A railroad shall issue each person designated as a certified locomotive engineer a certificate that complies with § 240.223 no later than 30 days from the date of its decision to certify or recertify that person.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 58 FR 19003, Apr. 9, 1993; 60 FR 53137, Oct. 12, 1995; 64 FR 60992, Nov. 8, 1999; 74 FR 68184, Dec. 23, 2009; 85 FR 81314, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.219 Denial of certification.

(a) A railroad shall notify a candidate for certification or recertification of information known to the railroad that forms the basis for denying the person certification and provide the person a reasonable opportunity to explain or rebut that adverse information in writing prior to denying certification. A railroad shall provide the locomotive engineer candidate with any written documents or records, including written statements, related to failure to meet a requirement of this part that support its pending denial decision.

(b) This section does not require further opportunity to comment if the railroad's denial is based solely on factors addressed by §§ 240.115, 240.117, and 240.119 and the opportunity to comment afforded by those sections has been provided.

(c) If a railroad denies a person certification or recertification, it shall notify the person of the adverse decision and explain, in writing, the basis for its denial decision. The basis for a railroad's denial decision shall address any explanation or rebuttal information that the locomotive engineer candidate may have provided in writing pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section. The document explaining the basis for the denial shall be served on the person within 10 days after the railroad's decision and shall give the date of the decision.

(d) A railroad shall not deny the person's certification for failing to comply with a railroad operating rule or practice that constitutes a violation under § 240.117(e)(1) through (5) if sufficient evidence exists to establish that an intervening cause prevented or materially impaired the engineer's ability to comply with that railroad operating rule or practice.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 85 FR 81315, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.221 Identification of qualified persons.

(a) A railroad shall maintain a written record identifying each person designated by it as a supervisor of locomotive engineers.

(b) A railroad shall maintain a written record identifying each person designated as a certified locomotive engineer. That listing of certified engineers shall indicate the class of service the railroad determines each person is qualified to perform and date of the railroad's certification decision.

(c) If a railroad is responsible for controlling joint operations territory, the listing shall include person(s) certified in accordance with § 240.229.

(d) The listing required by paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section shall:

(1) Be updated at least annually;

(2) Be available at the divisional or regional headquarters of the railroad; and

(3) Be available for inspection or copying by FRA during regular business hours.

(e) It shall be unlawful for any railroad to knowingly or any individual to willfully:

(1) Make, cause to be made, or participate in the making of a false entry on the list required by this section; or

(2) Otherwise falsify such list through material misstatement, omission, or mutilation.

(f) Nothing in this section precludes a railroad from maintaining the list required under this section in an electronic format provided that:

(1) The railroad maintains an information technology security program adequate to ensure the integrity of the electronic data storage system, including the prevention of unauthorized access to the program logic or the list;

(2) The program and data storage system must be protected by a security system that utilizes an employee identification number and password, or a comparable method, to establish appropriate levels of program access meeting all of the following standards:

(i) No two individuals have the same electronic identity; and

(ii) An entry on the list cannot be deleted or altered by any individual after the entry is certified by the employee who created the entry;

(3) Any amendment to the list is either:

(i) Electronically stored apart from the entry on the list that it amends; or

(ii) Electronically attached to the entry on the list as information without changing the original entry;

(4) Each amendment to the list uniquely identifies the person making the amendment;

(5) The system employed by the railroad for data storage permits reasonable access and retrieval of the information in usable format when requested to furnish data by FRA representatives; and

(6) Information retrieved from the system can be easily produced in a printed format which can be readily provided to FRA representatives in a timely manner and authenticated by a designated representative of the railroad as a true and accurate copy of the railroad's records if requested to do so by FRA representatives.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 74 FR 68184, Dec. 23, 2009; 85 FR 81315, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.223 Criteria for the certificate.

(a) As a minimum, each certificate issued in compliance with this part shall:

(1) Identify the railroad or parent company that is issuing it;

(2) Indicate that the railroad, acting in conformity with this part, has determined that the person to whom it is being issued has been determined to be qualified to operate a locomotive;

(3) Identify the person to whom it is being issued (including the person's name, employee identification number, the year of birth, and either a physical description or photograph of the person);

(4) Identify any conditions or limitations, including the class of service or conditions to ameliorate vision or hearing acuity deficiencies, that restrict the person's operational authority;

(5) Show the effective date of each certification held;

(6) Be signed by a supervisor of locomotive engineers or other individual designated in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section;

(7) Show the date of the person's last operational monitoring event as required by §§ 240.129(c) and 240.303(b), unless that information is reflected on supplementary documents which the locomotive engineer has in his or her possession when operating a locomotive; and

(8) Be of sufficiently small size to permit being carried in an ordinary pocket wallet.

(b) Each railroad to which this part applies shall designate in writing any person, other than a supervisor of locomotive engineers, that it authorizes to sign the certificates described in this section. The designation can identify such persons by name or job title.

(c) Nothing in paragraph (a) of this section shall prohibit any railroad from including additional information on the certificate or supplementing the certificate through other documents.

(d) It shall be unlawful for any railroad to knowingly or any individual to willfully:

(1) Make, cause to be made, or participate in the making of a false entry on that certificate; or

(2) Otherwise falsify that certificate through material misstatement, omission, or mutilation.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 58 FR 19003, Apr. 9, 1993; 64 FR 60993, Nov. 8, 1999; 85 FR 81315, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.225 Reliance on qualification determinations made by other railroads.

(a) A railroad that is considering certification of a person as a qualified engineer may rely on determinations made by another railroad concerning that person's qualifications. The railroad's certification program shall address how the railroad will administer the training of previously uncertified engineers with extensive operating experience or previously certified engineers who have had their certification expire. If a railroad's certification program fails to specify how it will train a previously certified engineer hired from another railroad, then the railroad shall require the newly hired engineer to take the hiring railroad's entire training program.

(b) A railroad relying on another's certification shall determine that:

(1) The prior certification is still valid in accordance with the provisions of §§ 240.201, 240.217, and 240.307;

(2) The prior certification was for the same classification of locomotive or train service as the certification being issued under this section;

(3) The person has received training on and visually observed the physical characteristics of the new territory in accordance with § 240.123;

(4) The person has demonstrated the necessary knowledge concerning the railroad's operating rules in accordance with § 240.125; and

(5) The person has demonstrated the necessary performance skills concerning the railroad's operating rules in accordance with § 240.127.

[85 FR 81315, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.227 Reliance on qualification requirements of other countries.

(a) A railroad that conducts joint operations with a Canadian railroad may certify, for the purposes of compliance with this part, that a person is qualified to be a locomotive or train service engineer provided it determines that:

(1) The person is employed by the Canadian railroad; and

(2) The person meets or exceeds the qualifications standards issued by Transport Canada for such service.

(b) Any Canadian railroad that is required to comply with this regulation may certify that a person is qualified to be a locomotive or train service engineer provided it determines that:

(1) The person is employed by the Canadian railroad; and

(2) The person meets or exceeds the qualifications standards issued by Transport Canada for such service.

§ 240.229 Requirements for joint operations territory.

(a) Except for minimal joint operations provided for in paragraph (f) of this section, no railroad that is responsible for controlling the conduct of joint operations with another railroad shall permit or require any person to operate a locomotive in any class of train or engine service unless that person has been certified as a qualified locomotive engineer for the purposes of joint operations and issued a certificate that complies with § 240.223.

(b) Each railroad that is responsible for controlling the conduct of joint operations with another railroad shall certify a person as a qualified locomotive engineer for the purposes of joint operations either by making the determinations required under subpart C of this part or by relying on the certification issued by another railroad under this part.

(c) A railroad that controls joint operations may rely on the certification issued by another railroad under the following conditions:

(1) The controlling railroad shall determine:

(i) That the person has been certified as a qualified engineer under the provisions of this part by the railroad which employs that individual;

(ii) That the person certified as a locomotive engineer by the other railroad has demonstrated the necessary knowledge concerning the controlling railroad's operating rules, if the rules are different;

(iii) That the person certified as a locomotive engineer by the other railroad has the necessary operating skills concerning the joint operations territory; and

(iv) That the person certified as a locomotive engineer by the other railroad has the necessary familiarity with the physical characteristics for the joint operations territory; and,

(2) The railroad which employs the individual shall determine that the person called to operate on the controlling railroad is a certified engineer who is qualified to operate on that track segment; and

(3) Each locomotive engineer who is called to operate on another railroad shall:

(i) Be qualified on the segment of track upon which he or she will operate in accordance with the requirements set forth by the controlling railroad; and,

(ii) Immediately notify the railroad upon which he or she is employed if he or she is not qualified to perform that service.

(d) A railroad that controls joint operations and certifies locomotive engineers from a different railroad may comply with the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section by noting its supplemental certification decision on the original certificate as provided for in § 240.223(c).

(e) A railroad responsible for controlling the conduct of joint operations with another railroad shall be deemed to be in compliance with paragraph (a) of this section when it provides a qualified person to accompany a locomotive engineer who lacks joint operations certification during that engineer's operations in joint operations territory. As used in this section qualified person means either a designated supervisor of locomotive engineers or a certified train service engineer determined by the controlling railroad to have the necessary knowledge concerning the controlling railroad's operating rules and to have the necessary operating skills including familiarity with its physical characteristics concerning the joint operations territory.

(f) A railroad that is responsible for controlling the conduct of joint operations with another railroad may permit a certified locomotive engineer to operate a locomotive in any class of train or engine service without determining that the person has been certified as a qualified locomotive engineer for the purposes of joint operations when a minimal joint operation is involved. For the purposes of this section a minimal joint operation exists when a locomotive or train belonging to one railroad is being operated on the same track on which operations are conducted by the railroad controlling operations, under the following conditions:

(1) The maximum authorized speed for operations on the track does not exceed 20 miles per hour;

(2) The track is other than a main track;

(3) Operations are conducted under operating rules that require every locomotive and train to proceed at a speed that permits stopping within one half the range of vision of the locomotive engineer; and

(4) The maximum distance for joint operations on the track does not exceed one mile.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 58 FR 19003, Apr. 9, 1993; 64 FR 60993, Nov. 8, 1999]

§ 240.231 Requirements for locomotive engineers unfamiliar with physical characteristics in other than joint operations.

(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, no locomotive engineer shall operate a locomotive over a territory unless he or she is qualified on the physical characteristics of the territory pursuant to the railroad's certification program.

(b) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, if a locomotive engineer lacks qualification on the physical characteristics required by paragraph (a) of this section, he or she shall be assisted by a pilot qualified over the territory pursuant to the railroad's certification program.

(1) For a locomotive engineer who has never been qualified on the physical characteristics of the territory over which he or she is to operate a locomotive or train, the pilot shall be a person qualified and certified as a locomotive engineer who is not an assigned crew member.

(2) For a locomotive engineer who was previously qualified on the physical characteristics of the territory over which he or she is to operate a locomotive or train, but whose qualification has expired, the pilot may be any person, who is not an assigned crew member, qualified on the physical characteristics of the territory.

(c) Pilots are not required if the movement is on a section of track with an average grade of less than 1% over 3 continuous miles, and

(1) The track is other than a main track; or

(2) The maximum distance the locomotive or train will be operated does not exceed one mile; or

(3) The maximum authorized speed for any operation on the track does not exceed 20 miles per hour; or

(4) Operations are conducted under operating rules that require every locomotive and train to proceed at a speed that permits stopping within one half the range of vision of the locomotive engineer.

[64 FR 60993, Nov. 8, 1999]

Subpart D—Administration of the Certification Program

§ 240.301 Replacement of certificates.

(a) A railroad shall have a system for the prompt replacement of lost, stolen or mutilated certificates at no cost to engineers. That system shall be reasonably accessible to certified locomotive engineers in need of a replacement certificate or temporary replacement certificate.

(b) At a minimum, a temporary replacement certificate must identify the person to whom it is being issued (including the person's name, identification number and year of birth); indicate the date of issuance; and be authorized by a supervisor of locomotive engineers or other individual designated in accordance with § 240.223(b). Temporary replacement certificates may be delivered electronically and are valid for a period no greater than 30 days.

[85 FR 81316, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.303 Operational monitoring requirements.

(a) Each railroad to which this part applies shall, prior to FRA approval of its program in accordance with § 240.201, have a program to monitor the conduct of its certified locomotive engineers by performing both operational monitoring observations and by conducting unannounced operating rules compliance tests.

(b) The program shall be conducted so that each locomotive engineer, except as provided in § 240.129(h), shall be given at least one operational monitoring observation by a qualified supervisor of locomotive engineers in each calendar year.

(c) The program shall be conducted so that each locomotive engineer, except as provided in § 240.129(h), shall be given at least one unannounced, compliance test each calendar year.

(d) The unannounced test program shall:

(1) Test engineer compliance with:

(i) One or more provisions of the railroad's operating rules that require response to signals that display less than a “clear” aspect, if the railroad operates with a signal system that must comply with part 236 of this chapter;

(ii) One or more provisions of the railroad's operating rules, timetable or other mandatory directives that require affirmative response by the locomotive engineer to less favorable conditions than that which existed prior to initiation of the test; or

(iii) Provisions of the railroad's operating rules, timetable or other mandatory directives the violations of which by engineers were cited by the railroad as the cause of train accidents or train incidents in accident reports filed in compliance with part 225 of this chapter for the preceding year;

(2) Be conducted that so that the administration of these tests is effectively distributed throughout whatever portion of a 24-hour day that the railroad conducts its operations;

(3) Be conducted so that individual tests are administered without prior notice to the locomotive engineer being tested; and

(4) Be conducted so that the results of the test are recorded on the certificate and entered on the record established under § 240.215 within 30 days of the day the test is administered.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 74 FR 68184, Dec. 23, 2009; 85 FR 81316, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.305 Prohibited conduct.

(a) It shall be unlawful to:

(1) Operate a locomotive or train past a signal indication, excluding a hand or a radio signal indication or a switch, that requires a complete stop before passing it; or

(2) Operate a locomotive or train at a speed which exceeds the maximum authorized limit by at least 10 miles per hour. Where restricted speed is in effect, only those violations of the conditional clause of restricted speed rules (i.e., the clause that requires stopping within one half of the locomotive engineer's range of vision), or the operational equivalent thereof, which cause reportable accidents or incidents under part 225 of this chapter, shall be considered instances of failure to adhere to this section; or

(3) Operate a locomotive or train without adhering to procedures for the safe use of train or engine brakes when the procedures are required for compliance with the Class I, Class IA, Class II, Class III, or transfer train brake test provisions of 49 CFR part 232 or when the procedures are required for compliance with the class 1, class 1A, class II, or running brake test provisions of 49 CFR part 238;

(4) Fail to comply with any mandatory directive concerning the movement of a locomotive or train by occupying main track or a segment of main track without proper authority or permission;

(5) Fail to comply with prohibitions against tampering with locomotive mounted safety devices, or knowingly operate or permit to be operated a train with an unauthorized disabled safety device in the controlling locomotive. (See 49 CFR part 218, subpart D, and appendix C to part 218);

(6) Be a Designated Supervisor of Locomotive Engineers, a certified locomotive engineer pilot or an instructor engineer who is monitoring, piloting or instructing a locomotive engineer and fails to take appropriate action to prevent a violation of paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(5) of this section. Appropriate action does not mean that a supervisor, pilot or instructor must prevent a violation from occurring at all costs; the duty may be met by warning an engineer of a potential or foreseeable violation. A Designated Supervisor of Locomotive Engineers will not be held culpable under this section when this monitoring event is conducted as part of the railroad's operational compliance tests as defined in §§ 217.9 and 240.303 of this chapter.

(b) Each locomotive engineer who has received a certificate required under this part shall:

(1) Have that certificate in his or her possession while on duty as an engineer; and

(2) Display that certificate upon the receipt of a request to do so from:

(i) A representative of the Federal Railroad Administration;

(ii) A State inspector authorized under part 212 of this chapter;

(iii) An officer of the issuing railroad; or

(iv) An officer of another railroad when operating a locomotive or train in joint operations territory.

(c) Any locomotive engineer who is notified or called to operate a locomotive or train and such operation would cause the locomotive engineer to exceed certificate limitations, set forth in accordance with subpart B of this part, shall immediately notify the railroad that he or she is not qualified to perform that anticipated service and it shall be unlawful for the railroad to require such service.

(d) During the duration of any certification interval, a locomotive engineer who has a current certificate from more than one railroad shall immediately notify the other certifying railroad(s) if he or she is denied recertification by a railroad or has his or her certification revoked by a railroad.

(e) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to alter a certified locomotive engineer's duty to comply with other provisions of this chapter concerning railroad safety.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 58 FR 19004, Apr. 9, 1993; 64 FR 60993, Nov. 8, 1999; 74 FR 68184, Dec. 23, 2009; 85 FR 81316, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.307 Revocation of certification.

(a) Except as provided for in § 240.119(e), a railroad that certifies or recertifies a person as a qualified locomotive engineer and, during the period that certification is valid, acquires reliable information regarding violation(s) of § 240.117(e) or § 240.119(c) shall revoke the person's engineer certificate.

(b) Pending a revocation determination under this section, the railroad shall:

(1) Upon receipt of reliable information regarding violation(s) of § 240.117(e) or § 240.119(c), immediately suspend the person's certificate;

(2) Prior to or upon suspending the person's certificate, provide notice of the reason for the suspension, the pending revocation, and an opportunity for a hearing before a presiding officer other than the investigating officer. The notice may initially be given either orally or in writing. If given orally, it must be confirmed in writing and the written confirmation must be made promptly. Written confirmation which conforms to the notification provisions of an applicable collective bargaining agreement shall be deemed to satisfy the written confirmation requirements of this section. In the absence of an applicable collective bargaining agreement provision, the written confirmation must be made within 96 hours.

(3) Convene the hearing within the deadline prescribed by either paragraph (c)(1) of this section or the applicable collective bargaining agreement as permitted under paragraph (d) of this section;

(4) No later than the convening of the hearing and notwithstanding the terms of an applicable collective bargaining agreement, the railroad convening the hearing shall provide the person with a copy of the written information and list of witnesses the railroad will present at the hearing. If requested, a recess to the start of the hearing will be granted if that information is not provided until just prior to the convening of the hearing. If the information was provided through statements of an employee of the convening railroad, the railroad will make that employee available for examination during the hearing required by paragraph (b)(3) of this section. Examination may be telephonic where it is impractical to provide the witness at the hearing;

(5) Determine, on the record of the hearing, whether the person no longer meets the certification requirements of this part stating explicitly the basis for the conclusion reached;

(6) When appropriate, impose the pertinent period of revocation provided for in § 240.117 or § 240.119; and

(7) Retain the record of the hearing for 3 years after the date the decision is rendered.

(c) Except as provided for in paragraphs (d), (f), (i) and (j) of this section, a hearing required by this section shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures:

(1) The hearing shall be convened within 10 days of the date the certificate is suspended unless the locomotive engineer requests or consents to delay in the start of the hearing.

(2) The hearing shall be conducted by a presiding officer, who can be any proficient person authorized by the railroad other than the investigating officer.

(3) The presiding officer will exercise the powers necessary to regulate the conduct of the hearing for the purpose of achieving a prompt and fair determination of all material issues in controversy.

(4) The presiding officer shall convene and preside over the hearing.

(5) Testimony by witnesses at the hearing shall be recorded verbatim.

(6) All relevant and probative evidence shall be received unless the presiding officer determines the evidence to be unduly repetitive or so extensive and lacking in relevancy that its admission would impair the prompt, orderly, and fair resolution of the proceeding.

(7) The presiding officer may:

(i) Adopt any needed procedures for the submission of evidence in written form;

(ii) Examine witnesses at the hearing;

(iii) Convene, recess, adjourn or otherwise regulate the course of the hearing; and

(iv) Take any other action authorized by or consistent with the provisions of this part and permitted by law that may expedite the hearing or aid in the disposition of the proceeding.

(8) Parties may appear and be heard on their own behalf or through designated representatives. Parties may offer relevant evidence including testimony and may conduct such examination of witnesses as may be required for a full disclosure of the relevant facts.

(9) The record in the proceeding shall be closed at the conclusion of the hearing unless the presiding officer allows additional time for the submission of information. In such instances, the record shall be left open for such time as the presiding officer grants for that purpose.

(10) No later than 10 days after the close of the record, a railroad official, other than the investigating officer, shall prepare and sign a written decision in the proceeding.

(11) The decision shall:

(i) Contain the findings of fact as well as the basis therefor, concerning all material issues of fact presented on the record and citations to all applicable railroad rules and practices;

(ii) State whether the railroad official found that a revocable event occurred and the applicable period of revocation with a citation to § 240.117 or § 240.119; and

(iii) Be served on the employee and the employee's representative, if any, with the railroad to retain proof of that service.

(12) The railroad shall have the burden of proving that the locomotive engineer's conduct was not in compliance with the applicable railroad operating rule or practice or part 219 of this chapter.

(d) A hearing required by this section which is conducted in a manner that conforms procedurally to the applicable collective bargaining agreement shall be deemed to satisfy the procedural requirements of this section.

(e) A hearing required under this section may be consolidated with any disciplinary or other hearing arising from the same facts, but in all instances a railroad official, other than the investigating officer, shall make separate findings as to the revocation required under this section.

(f) A person may waive the right to the hearing provided under this section. That waiver shall:

(1) Be made in writing;

(2) Reflect the fact that the person has knowledge and understanding of these rights and voluntarily surrenders them; and

(3) Be signed by the person making the waiver.

(g) A railroad that has relied on the certification by another railroad under the provisions of § 240.227 or § 240.229, shall revoke its certification if, during the period that certification is valid, the railroad acquires information that convinces it that another railroad has revoked its certification in accordance with the provisions of this section. The requirement to provide a hearing under this section is satisfied when any single railroad holds a hearing and no additional hearing is required prior to a revocation by more than one railroad arising from the same facts.

(h) The period of certificate suspension prior to the commencement of a hearing required under this section shall be credited towards satisfying any applicable revocation period imposed in accordance with the provisions of § 240.117.

(i) A railroad:

(1) Shall not revoke the person's certification as provided for in paragraph (a) of this section if sufficient evidence exists to establish that an intervening cause prevented or materially impaired the locomotive engineer's ability to comply with the railroad operating rule or practice that constitutes a violation under § 240.117(e)(1) through (5); or

(2) May decide not to revoke the person's certification as provided for in paragraph (a) of this section if sufficient evidence exists to establish that the violation of § 240.117(e)(1) through (5) was of a minimal nature and had no direct or potential effect on rail safety.

(j) The railroad shall place the relevant information in the records maintained in compliance with § 240.309 for Class I (including the National Railroad Passenger Corporation) and Class II railroads, and § 240.215 for Class III railroads if sufficient evidence meeting the criteria provided in paragraph (i) of this section, becomes available either:

(1) Prior to a railroad's action to suspend the certificate as provided for in paragraph (b)(1) of this section; or

(2) Prior to the convening of the hearing provided for in this section.

(k) Provided that the railroad makes a good faith determination after a reasonable inquiry that the course of conduct provided for in paragraph (i) of this section is appropriate, the railroad which does not suspend a locomotive engineer's certification, as provided for in paragraph (a) of this section, is not in violation of paragraph (a) of this section.

[58 FR 19004, Apr. 9, 1993, as amended at 60 FR 53137, Oct. 12, 1995; 64 FR 60994, Nov. 8, 1999; 74 FR 68185, Dec. 23, 2009; 85 FR 81316, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.308 Multiple certifications.

(a) A person may hold both conductor and locomotive engineer certification.

(b) A railroad that issues multiple certificates to a person, shall, to the extent possible, coordinate the expiration date of those certificates.

(c) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, a locomotive engineer, including a remote control operator, who is operating a locomotive without an assigned certified conductor must either be:

(1) Certified as both a locomotive engineer under this part and as a conductor under part 242 of this chapter; or

(2) Accompanied by a person certified as a conductor under part 242 of this chapter but who will be attached to the crew in a manner similar to that of an independent assignment.

(d) If the conductor is removed from a passenger train for a medical, police or other such emergency after the train departs from an initial terminal, the train may proceed to the first location where the conductor can be replaced without incurring undue delay without the locomotive engineer being a certified conductor. However, an assistant conductor or brakeman must be on the train and the locomotive engineer must be informed that there is no certified conductor on the train prior to any movement.

(e) During the duration of any certification interval, a person who holds a current conductor and/or locomotive engineer certificate from more than one railroad shall immediately notify the other certifying railroad(s) if he or she is denied conductor or locomotive engineer recertification under § 240.219 or § 242.401 of this chapter or has his or her conductor or locomotive engineer certification revoked under § 240.307 or § 242.407 of this chapter by another railroad.

(f) A person who holds a current conductor and locomotive engineer certificate and who has had his or her conductor certification revoked under § 242.407 of this chapter for a violation of § 242.403(e)(1) through (5) or (12) of this chapter may not work as a locomotive engineer during the period of revocation. However, a person who holds a current conductor and locomotive engineer certificate and who has had his or her conductor certification revoked under § 242.407 of this chapter for a violation of § 242.403(e)(6) through (11) may work as a locomotive engineer during the period of revocation.

(1) For purposes of determining the period for which a person may not work as a certified locomotive engineer due to a revocation of his or her conductor certification, only violations of § 242.403(e)(1) through (5) or (12) of this chapter will be counted. Thus, a person who holds a current conductor and locomotive engineer certificate and who has had his or her conductor certification revoked three times in less than 36 months for two violations of § 242.403(e)(6) and one violation of § 242.403(e)(1) would have his or her conductor certificate revoked for 1 year, but would not be permitted to work as a locomotive engineer for one month (i.e., the period of revocation for one violation of § 242.403(e)(1)).

(g) A person who holds a current conductor and locomotive engineer certificate and who has had his or her locomotive engineer certification revoked under § 240.307 may not work as a conductor during the period of revocation.

(h) A person who has had his or her locomotive engineer certification revoked under § 240.307 may not obtain a conductor certificate pursuant to part 242 of this chapter during the period of revocation.

(i) A person who had his or her conductor certification revoked under § 242.407 of this chapter for violations of § 242.403(e)(1) through (5) or (12) of this chapter may not obtain a locomotive engineer certificate pursuant to this part 240 during the period of revocation.

(j) A railroad that denies a person conductor certification or recertification under § 242.401 of this chapter shall not, solely on the basis of that denial, deny or revoke that person's locomotive engineer certification or recertification.

(k) A railroad that denies a person locomotive engineer certification or recertification under § 240.219 shall not, solely on the basis of that denial, deny or revoke that person's conductor certification or recertification.

(l) In lieu of issuing multiple certificates, a railroad may issue one certificate to a person who is certified as a conductor and a locomotive engineer. The certificate must comply with § 240.223 and § 242.207 of this chapter.

(m) A person who holds a current conductor and locomotive engineer certification and who is involved in a revocable event under § 240.307 or § 242.407 of this chapter may only have one certificate revoked for that event. The determination by the railroad as to which certificate to revoke for the revocable event must be based on the work the person was performing at the time the event occurred.

[85 FR 81317, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.309 Railroad oversight responsibilities.

(a) No later than March 31 of each year, each Class I railroad (including the National Railroad Passenger Corporation and a railroad providing commuter service) and Class II railroad shall conduct a formal annual review and analysis concerning the administration of its program for responding to detected instances of poor safety conduct by certified locomotive engineers during the prior calendar year.

(b) Each review and analysis shall involve:

(1) The number and nature of the instances of detected poor safety conduct including the nature of the remedial action taken in response thereto;

(2) The number and nature of FRA reported train accidents attributed to poor safety performance by locomotive engineers;

(3) The number and type of operational monitoring test failures and observations of inadequate skill performance recorded by supervisors of locomotive engineers; and

(4) If the railroad conducts joint operations with another railroad, the number of locomotive engineers employed by the other railroad(s) that: Were involved in events described in this paragraph (b) and were determined to be certified and to have possessed the necessary territorial qualifications for joint operations purposes by the controlling railroad.

(c) Based on that review and analysis each railroad shall determine what action(s) it will take to improve the safety of train operations to reduce or eliminate future incidents of that nature.

(d) If requested in writing by FRA, the railroad shall provide a report of the findings and conclusions reached during such annual review and analysis effort.

(e) For reporting purposes, information about the nature of detected poor safety conduct shall be capable of segregation for study and evaluation purposes into the following categories:

(1) Incidents involving noncompliance with part 218 of this chapter;

(2) Incidents involving noncompliance with part 219 of this chapter;

(3) Incidents involving noncompliance with the procedures for the safe use of train or engine brakes when the procedures are required for compliance with the Class I, Class IA, Class II, Class III, or transfer train brake test provisions of 49 CFR part 232 or when the procedures are required for compliance with the Class 1, Class 1A, Class II, or running brake test provisions of 49 CFR part 238;

(4) Incidents involving noncompliance with the railroad's operating rules involving operation of a locomotive or train to operate at a speed that exceeds the maximum authorized limit;

(5) Incidents involving noncompliance with the railroad's operating rules resulting in operation of a locomotive or train past any signal, excluding a hand or a radio signal indication or a switch, that requires a complete stop before passing it;

(6) Incidents involving noncompliance with the provisions of restricted speed, and the operational equivalent thereof, that must be reported under the provisions of part 225 of this chapter;

(7) Incidents involving occupying main track or a segment of main track without proper authority or permission;

(8) Incidents involving the failure to comply with prohibitions against tampering with locomotive mounted safety devices, or knowingly operating or permitting to be operated a train with an unauthorized or disabled safety device in the controlling locomotive; and

(9) Incidents involving noncompliance with the railroad's operating practices (including train handling procedures) resulting in excessive in-train force levels.

(f) For reporting purposes, an instance of poor safety conduct involving a person who holds both conductor certification pursuant to part 242 of this chapter and locomotive engineer certification pursuant to this part need only be reported once (either under § 242.215 of this chapter or this section). The determination as to where to report the instance of poor safety conduct should be based on the work the person was performing at the time the conduct occurred.

(g) For reporting purposes, each category of detected poor safety conduct identified in paragraph (b) of this section shall be capable of being annotated to reflect the following:

(1) The nature of the remedial action taken and the number of events subdivided so as to reflect which of the following actions was selected:

(i) Imposition of informal discipline;

(ii) Imposition of formal discipline;

(iii) Provision of informal training; or

(iv) Provision of formal training; and

(2) If the nature of the remedial action taken was formal discipline, the number of events further subdivided so as to reflect which of the following punishments was imposed by the railroad:

(i) The person was withheld from service;

(ii) The person was dismissed from employment; or

(iii) The person was issued demerits. If more than one form of punishment was imposed only that punishment deemed the most severe shall be shown.

(h) For reporting purposes, each category of detected poor safety conduct identified in paragraph (b) of this section which resulted in the imposition of formal or informal discipline shall be annotated to reflect the following:

(1) The number of instances in which the railroad's internal appeals process reduced the punishment initially imposed at the conclusion of its hearing; and

(2) The number of instances in which the punishment imposed by the railroad was reduced by any of the following entities: The National Railroad Adjustment Board, a Public Law Board, a Special Board of Adjustment or other body for the resolution of disputes duly constituted under the provisions of the Railway Labor Act.

(i) For reporting purposes, each category of detected poor safety conduct identified in paragraph (b) of this section shall be capable of being annotated to reflect the following:

(1) The total number of incidents in that category;

(2) The number of incidents within that total which reflect incidents requiring an FRA accident/incident report under part 225 of this chapter; and

(3) The number of incidents within that total which were detected as a result of a scheduled operational monitoring effort.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 64 FR 60994, Nov. 8, 1999; 74 FR 68185, Dec. 23, 2009; 85 FR 81317, Dec. 15, 2020]

Subpart E—Dispute Resolution Procedures

§ 240.401 Review board established.

(a) Any person who has been denied certification, denied recertification, or has had his or her certification revoked and believes that a railroad incorrectly determined that he or she failed to meet the certification requirements of this part when making the decision to deny or revoke certification, may petition the Federal Railroad Administrator to review the railroad's decision.

(b) The Administrator has delegated initial responsibility for adjudicating such disputes to the Operating Crew Review Board.

(c) The Operating Crew Review Board shall be composed of employees of the Federal Railroad Administration selected by the Administrator.

[85 FR 81318, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.403 Petition requirements.

(a) To obtain review of a railroad's decision to deny certification, deny recertification, or revoke certification, a person shall file a petition for review that complies with this section.

(b) Each petition shall:

(1) Be in writing;

(2) Be filed with the Docket Clerk, U.S. Department of Transportation, Docket Operations (M-30), West Building Ground Floor, Room W12-140, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE, Washington, DC 20590. The form of such request may be in written or electronic form consistent with the standards and requirements established by the Federal Docket Management System and posted on its website at http://www.regulations.gov;

(3) Contain all available information that the person thinks supports the person's belief that the railroad acted improperly, including:

(i) The petitioner's full name;

(ii) The petitioner's current mailing address;

(iii) The petitioner's daytime telephone number;

(iv) The petitioner's email address (if available);

(v) The name and address of the railroad; and

(vi) The facts that the petitioner believes constitute the improper action by the railroad, specifying the locations, dates, and identities of all persons who were present or involved in the railroad's actions (to the degree known by the petitioner);

(4) Explain the nature of the remedial action sought;

(5) Be supplemented by a copy of all written documents in the petitioner's possession or reasonably available to the petitioner that document that railroad's decision;

(6) Be filed in a timely manner; and

(7) Be supplemented, if requested by the Operating Crew Review Board, with a copy of the information under 49 CFR 40.329 that laboratories, medical review officers, and other service agents are required to release to employees. The petitioner must provide written explanation in response to an Operating Crew Review Board request if written documents that should be reasonably available to the petitioner are not supplied.

(c) A petition seeking review of a railroad's decision to deny certification or recertification or revoke certification in accordance with the procedures required by § 240.307 filed with FRA more than 120 days after the date the railroad's denial or revocation decision was served on the petitioner will be denied as untimely except that the Operating Crew Review Board for cause shown may extend the petition filing period at any time in its discretion:

(1) Provided that the request for extension is filed before the expiration of the period provided in this paragraph (c); or

(2) Provided that the failure to file timely was the result of excusable neglect.

(d) A party aggrieved by a Board decision to deny a petition as untimely or not in compliance with the requirements of this section may file an appeal with the Administrator in accordance with § 240.411.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 64 FR 60995, Nov. 8, 1999; 64 FR 70196, Dec. 16, 1999; 74 FR 25175, May 27, 2009; 85 FR 81318, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.405 Processing certification review petitions.

(a) Each petition shall be acknowledged in writing by FRA. The acknowledgment shall contain the docket number assigned to the petition and a statement of FRA's intention that the Board will attempt to render a decision on this petition within 180 days from the date that the railroad's response is received or from the date upon which the railroad's response period has lapsed pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section.

(b) Upon receipt of the petition, FRA will notify the railroad that it has received the petition and where the petition may be accessed.

(c) Within 60 days from the date of the notification provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the railroad may submit to FRA any information that the railroad considers pertinent to the petition. Late filings will only be considered to the extent practicable.

(d) A railroad that submits such information shall:

(1) Identify the petitioner by name and the docket number of the review proceeding and provide the railroad's email address (if available);

(2) Serve a copy of the information being submitted to FRA to the petitioner and petitioner's representative, if any; and

(3) File the information with the Docket Clerk, U.S. Department of Transportation, Docket Operations (M-30), West Building Ground Floor, Room W12-140, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE, Washington, DC 20590. The form of such information may be in written or electronic form consistent with the standards and requirements established by the Federal Docket Management System and posted on its website at http://www.regulations.gov.

(e) Each petition will then be referred to the Operating Crew Review Board for a decision.

(f) Based on the record, the Board shall have the authority to grant, deny, dismiss, or remand the petition.

(g) If the Board finds that there is insufficient basis for granting or denying the petition, the Board shall issue an order affording the parties an opportunity to provide additional information or argument consistent with its findings.

(h) When considering factual issues, the Board will determine whether there is substantial evidence to support the railroad's decision, and a negative finding is grounds for granting the petition.

(i) When considering procedural issues, the Board will determine whether the petitioner suffered substantial harm that was caused by the failure to adhere to the dictated procedures for making the railroad's decision. A finding of substantial harm is grounds for reversing the railroad's decision. To establish grounds upon which the Board may grant relief, Petitioner must show:

(1) That procedural error occurred; and

(2) The procedural error caused substantial harm.

(j) Pursuant to its reviewing role, the Board will consider whether the railroad's legal interpretations are correct based on a de novo review.

(k) The Board will determine whether the denial or revocation of certification or recertification was improper under this part (i.e., based on an incorrect determination that the person failed to meet the certification requirements of this part) and grant or deny the petition accordingly. The Board will not otherwise consider the propriety of a railroad's decision, i.e., it will not consider whether the railroad properly applied its own more stringent requirements.

(l) The Board's written decision shall be served on the petitioner, including the petitioner's representative, if any, and the railroad.

[85 FR 81318, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.407 Request for a hearing.

(a) If adversely affected by the Operating Crew Review Board's decision, either the petitioner before the Board or the railroad involved shall have a right to an administrative proceeding as prescribed by § 240.409.

(b) To exercise that right, the adversely affected party shall, within 20 days of service of the Board's decision on that party, file a written request with the U.S. Department of Transportation, Docket Operations (M-30), West Building Ground Floor, Room W12-140, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., Washington, DC 20590. The form of such request may be in written or electronic form consistent with the standards and requirements established by the Federal Docket Management System and posted on its web site at http://www.regulations.gov.

(c) If a party fails to request a hearing within the period provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the Operating Crew Review Board's decision will constitute final agency action.

(d) If a party elects to request a hearing, that person shall submit a written request to the Docket Clerk containing the following:

(1) The name, address, telephone number, and email address (if available) of the respondent and the requesting party's designated representative, if any;

(2) The specific factual issues, industry rules, regulations, or laws that the requesting party alleges need to be examined in connection with the certification decision in question; and

(3) The signature of the requesting party or the requesting party's representative, if any.

(e) Upon receipt of a hearing request complying with paragraph (d) of this section, FRA shall arrange for the appointment of a presiding officer who shall schedule the hearing for the earliest practicable date.

[60 FR 53137, Oct. 12, 1995, as amended at 64 FR 70196, Dec. 16, 1999; 74 FR 25175, May 27, 2009; 85 FR 81319, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.409 Hearings.

(a) An administrative hearing for a locomotive engineer certification petition shall be conducted by a presiding officer, who can be any person authorized by the Administrator, including an administrative law judge.

(b) The presiding officer may exercise the powers of the Administrator to regulate the conduct of the hearing for the purpose of achieving a prompt and fair determination of all material issues in controversy.

(c) The presiding officer shall convene and preside over the hearing. The hearing shall be a de novo hearing to find the relevant facts and determine the correct application of this part to those facts. The presiding officer may determine that there is no genuine issue covering some or all material facts and limit evidentiary proceedings to any issues of material fact as to which there is a genuine dispute.

(d) The presiding officer may authorize discovery of the types and quantities which in the presiding officer's discretion will contribute to a fair hearing without unduly burdening the parties. The presiding officer may impose appropriate non-monetary sanctions, including limitations as to the presentation of evidence and issues, for any party's willful failure or refusal to comply with approved discovery requests.

(e) Every petition, motion, response, or other authorized or required document shall be signed by the party filing the same, or by a duly authorized officer or representative of record, or by any other person. If signed by such other person, the reason therefor must be stated and the power of attorney or other authority authorizing such other person to subscribe the document must be filed with the document. The signature of the person subscribing any document constitutes a certification that he or she has read the document; that to the best of his or her knowledge, information and belief every statement contained in the document is true and no such statements are misleading; and that it is not interposed for delay or to be vexatious.

(f) After the request for a hearing is filed, all documents filed or served upon one party must be served upon all parties. Each party may designate a person upon whom service is to be made when not specified by law, regulation, or directive of the presiding officer. If a party does not designate a person upon whom service is to be made, then service may be made upon any person having subscribed to a submission of the party being served, unless otherwise specified by law, regulation, or directive of the presiding officer. Proof of service shall accompany all documents when they are tendered for filing.

(g) If any document initiating, filed, or served in, a proceeding is not in substantial compliance with the applicable law, regulation, or directive of the presiding officer, the presiding officer may strike or dismiss all or part of such document, or require its amendment.

(h) Any party to a proceeding may appear and be heard in person or by an authorized representative.

(i) Any person testifying at a hearing or deposition may be accompanied, represented, and advised by an attorney or other representative, and may be examined by that person.

(j) Any party may request to consolidate or separate the hearing of two or more petitions by motion to the presiding officer, when they arise from the same or similar facts or when the matters are for any reason deemed more efficiently heard together.

(k) Except as provided in § 240.407(c) of this part and paragraph (u)(4) of this section, whenever a party has the right or is required to take action within a period prescribed by this part, or by law, regulation, or directive of the presiding officer, the presiding officer may extend such period, with or without notice, for good cause, provided another party is not substantially prejudiced by such extension. A request to extend a period which has already expired may be denied as untimely.

(l) An application to the presiding officer for an order or ruling not otherwise specifically provided for in this part shall be by motion. The motion shall be filed with the presiding officer and, if written, served upon all parties. All motions, unless made during the hearing, shall be written. Motions made during hearings may be made orally on the record, except that the presiding officer may direct that any oral motion be reduced to writing. Any motion shall state with particularity the grounds therefor and the relief or order sought, and shall be accompanied by any affidavits or other evidence desired to be relied upon which is not already part of the record. Any matter submitted in response to a written motion must be filed and served within fourteen (14) days of the motion, or within such other period as directed by the presiding officer.

(m) Testimony by witnesses at the hearing shall be given under oath and the hearing shall be recorded verbatim. The presiding officer shall give the parties to the proceeding adequate opportunity during the course of the hearing for the presentation of arguments in support of or in opposition to motions, and objections and exceptions to rulings of the presiding officer. The presiding officer may permit oral argument on any issues for which the presiding officer deems it appropriate and beneficial. Any evidence or argument received or proffered orally shall be transcribed and made a part of the record. Any physical evidence or written argument received or proffered shall be made a part of the record, except that the presiding officer may authorize the substitution of copies, photographs, or descriptions, when deemed to be appropriate.

(n) The presiding officer shall employ the Federal Rules of Evidence for United States Courts and Magistrates as general guidelines for the introduction of evidence. Notwithstanding paragraph (m) of this section, all relevant and probative evidence shall be received unless the presiding officer determines the evidence to be unduly repetitive or so extensive and lacking in relevancy that its admission would impair the prompt, orderly, and fair resolution of the proceeding.

(o) The presiding officer may:

(1) Administer oaths and affirmations;

(2) Issue subpoenas as provided for in § 209.7 of part 209 in this chapter;

(3) Adopt any needed procedures for the submission of evidence in written form;

(4) Examine witnesses at the hearing;

(5) Convene, recess, adjourn or otherwise regulate the course of the hearing; and

(6) Take any other action authorized by or consistent with the provisions of this part and permitted by law that may expedite the hearing or aid in the disposition of the proceeding.

(p) The petitioner before the Operating Crew Review Board, the railroad involved in taking the certification action, and FRA shall be parties at the hearing. All parties may participate in the hearing and may appear and be heard on their own behalf or through designated representatives. All parties may offer relevant evidence, including testimony, and may conduct such cross-examination of witnesses as may be required to make a record of the relevant facts.

(q) The party requesting the administrative hearing shall be the “hearing petitioner.” The hearing petitioner shall have the burden of proving its case by a preponderance of the evidence. Hence, if the hearing petitioner is the railroad involved in taking the certification action, that railroad will have the burden of proving that its decision to deny certification, deny recertification, or revoke certification was correct. Conversely, if the petitioner before the Operating Crew Review Board is the hearing petitioner, that person will have the burden of proving that the railroad's decision to deny certification, deny recertification, or revoke certification was incorrect. Between the petitioner before the Operating Crew Review Board and the railroad involved in taking the certification action, the party who is not the hearing petitioner will be a respondent.

(r) FRA will be a mandatory party to the administrative hearing. At the start of each proceeding, FRA will be a respondent.

(s) The record in the proceeding shall be closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing unless the presiding officer allows additional time for the submission of additional evidence. In such instances the record shall be left open for such time as the presiding officer grants for that purpose.

(t) At the close of the record, the presiding officer shall prepare a written decision in the proceeding.

(u) The decision:

(1) Shall contain the findings of fact and conclusions of law, as well as the basis for each concerning all material issues of fact or law presented on the record;

(2) Shall be served on the hearing petitioner and all other parties to the proceeding;

(3) Shall not become final for 35 days after issuance;

(4) Constitutes final agency action unless an aggrieved party files an appeal within 35 days after issuance; and

(5) Is not precedential.

[60 FR 53137, Oct. 12, 1995, as amended at 85 FR 81319, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 240.411 Appeals.

(a) Any party aggrieved by the presiding officer's decision may file an appeal in the presiding officer's docket. The appeal must be filed within 35 days of issuance of the decision. A copy of the appeal shall be served on each party. The appeal shall set forth objections to the presiding officer's decision, supported by reference to applicable laws and regulations and with specific reference to the record. If no appeal is timely filed, the presiding officer's decision constitutes final agency action.

(b) A party may file a reply to the appeal within 25 days of service of the appeal. The reply shall be supported by reference to applicable laws and regulations and with specific reference to the record, if the party relies on evidence contained in the record.

(c) The Administrator may extend the period for filing an appeal or a response for good cause shown, provided that the written request for extension is served before expiration of the applicable period provided in this section.

(d) The Administrator has sole discretion to permit oral argument on the appeal. On the Administrator's own initiative or written motion by any party, the Administrator may grant the parties an opportunity for oral argument.

(e) The Administrator may remand, vacate, affirm, reverse, alter or modify the decision of the presiding officer and the Administrator's decision constitutes final agency action except where the terms of the Administrator's decision (for example, remanding a case to the presiding officer) show that the parties' administrative remedies have not been exhausted.

(f) An appeal from an Operating Crew Review Board decision pursuant to § 240.403(d) must be filed in the Board's docket within 35 days of issuance of the decision. A copy of the appeal shall be served on each party. The Administrator may affirm or vacate the Board's decision, and may remand the petition to the Board for further proceedings. An Administrator's decision to affirm the Board's decision constitutes final agency action.

[56 FR 28254, June 19, 1991, as amended at 60 FR 53138, Oct. 12, 1995; 64 FR 60995, Nov. 8, 1999; 74 FR 25175, May 27, 2009; 85 FR 81319, Dec. 15, 2020]


PART 218—RAILROAD OPERATING PRACTICES

Authority:49 U.S.C. 20103, 20107, 20131, 20138, 20144, 20168; 28 U.S.C. 2461 note; and 49 CFR 1.89.

Source:44 FR 2175, Jan. 10, 1979, unless otherwise noted.

Subpart A—General

§ 218.1 Purpose.

This part prescribes minimum requirements for railroad operating rules and practices. Each railroad may prescribe additional or more stringent requirements in its operating rules, timetables, timetable special instructions, and other special instructions.

§ 218.3 Application.

(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, this part applies to railroads that operate rolling equipment on standard gage track which is part of the general railroad system of transportation.

(b) This part does not apply to—

(1) A railroad that operates only on track inside an installation which is not part of the general railroad system of transportation, or

(2) Rapid transit operations in an urban area that are not connected with the general railroad system of transportation.

[44 FR 2175, Jan. 10, 1979, as amended at 53 FR 28599, July 28, 1988]

§ 218.4 Preemptive effect.

Normal State negligence standards apply where there is no Federal action covering the subject matter. Under 49 U.S.C. 20106 (section 20106), issuance of the regulations in this part preempts any State law, regulation, or order covering the same subject matter, except an additional or more stringent law, regulation, or order that is necessary to eliminate or reduce an essentially local railroad safety or railroad security hazard; that is not incompatible with a law, regulation, or order of the United States Government; and that does not unreasonably burden interstate commerce. Section 20106 permits State tort actions arising from events or activities occurring on or after January 18, 2002, for the following: Violation of the Federal standard of care established by regulation or order issued the Secretary of Transportation (with respect to railroad safety, such as these regulations) or the Secretary of Homeland Security (with respect to railroad security); a party's violation of, or failure to comply with, its own plan, rule, or standard that it created pursuant to a regulation or order issued by either of the two Secretaries; and a party's violation of a State standard that is necessary to eliminate or reduce an essentially local safety or security hazard, is not incompatible with a law, regulation, or order of the United States Government, and does not unreasonably burden interstate commerce. Nothing in section 20106 creates a Federal cause of action on behalf of an injured party or confers Federal question jurisdiction for such State law causes of action.

[73 FR 8498, Feb. 13, 2008]

§ 218.5 Definitions.

Absolute block   means a block in which no train is permitted to enter while it is occupied by another train.

Associate Administrator for Safety   means the Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety and Chief Safety Officer of the Federal Railroad Administration or that person's delegate as designated in writing.

Blue signal   means a clearly distinguishable blue flag or blue light by day and a blue light at night. When attached to the operating controls of a locomotive, it need not be lighted if the inside of the cab area of the locomotive is sufficiently lighted so as to make the blue signal clearly distinguishable.

Camp car   means any on-track vehicle, including outfit, camp, or bunk cars or modular homes mounted on flat cars used to house rail employees. It does not include wreck trains.

Car shop repair track area   means one or more tracks within an area in which the testing, servicing, repair, inspection, or rebuilding of railroad rolling equipment is under the exclusive control of mechanical department personnel.

Controlling locomotive   means a locomotive arranged as having the only controls over all electrical, mechanical and pneumatic functions for one or more locomotives, including controls transmitted by radio signals if so equipped. It does not include two or more locomotives coupled in multiple which can be moved from more than one set of locomotive controls.

Designated crew member   means an individual designated under the railroad's operating rules as the point of contact between a train or yard crew and a utility employee working with that crew.

Effective locking device   when used in relation to a manually operated switch or a derail means one which is:

(1) Vandal resistant;

(2) Tamper resistant; and

(3) Capable of being locked and unlocked only by the class, craft or group of employees for whom the protection is being provided.

Flagman's signals   means a red flag by day and a white light at night, and fusees as prescribed in the railroad's operating rules.

FTA   means the Federal Transit Administration.

Group of workers   means two or more workers of the same or different crafts assigned to work together as a unit under a common authority and who are in communication with each other while the work is being done.

Hazard   means an existing or potential condition that could lead to an unplanned event or series of events that can result in an accident or incident (i.e., mishap); injury, illness, or death; damage to or loss of a system, equipment, or property; or damage to the environment.

Helper service train operation   means the train is a locomotive or group of locomotives being used to assist another train that has incurred mechanical failure or lacks sufficient tractive force necessary to traverse a particular section of track due to train tonnage and the grade of the terrain.

Interlocking limits   means the tracks between the opposing home signals of an interlocking.

Lite locomotive train operation   means the train is a locomotive or a consist of locomotives not attached to any piece of equipment or attached only to a caboose.

Locomotive   means, except for purposes of subpart F of this part, a self-propelled unit of equipment designed for moving other railroad rolling equipment in revenue service including a self-propelled unit designed to carry freight or passenger traffic, or both, and may consist of one or more units operated from a single control.

Locomotive, MU   means rail rolling equipment self-propelled by any power source and intended to provide transportation for members of the general public.

Locomotive servicing track area   means one or more tracks, within an area in which the testing, servicing, repair, inspection, or rebuilding of locomotives is under the exclusive control of mechanical department personnel.

Main track   means a track, other than an auxiliary track, extending through yards or between stations, upon which trains are operated by timetable or train order or both, or the use of which is governed by a signal system.

Mishap   means an event or condition or series of events or conditions resulting in an accident or incident.

One-person train crew   means either:

(1) One railroad employee is assigned a train as a train crew, and that single assigned person is performing the duties of both the locomotive engineer and the conductor; or

(2) More than one railroad employee is assigned a train as a train crew, but only a single assigned person, who is performing the duty of the locomotive engineer, is traveling on the train when the train is moving, and the remainder of the train crew, that would include the conductor if the locomotive engineer is not the assigned conductor, is assigned to intermittently assist the train's movements.

One-person train crewmember   means, in the context of a one-person train crew operation, the single assigned person who is performing the duty of the locomotive engineer and is traveling in the operating cab of the controlling locomotive when the train is moving.

Risk   means the combination of the expected probability (or frequency of occurrence) and the consequence (or severity) of a hazard.

Risk assessment   means the process of determining, either quantitatively or qualitatively, or both, the level of risk associated with train operations with a one-person train crew, compared to operations with a two-person (or larger) crew, under all operating conditions.

Rolling equipment   includes locomotives, railroad cars, and one or more locomotives coupled to one or more cars.

Switch providing access   means a switch which if traversed by rolling equipment could permit that rolling equipment to couple to the equipment being protected.

Switching service or switching operation   means classifying rail cars according to commodity or destination; assembling of cars for train movements; changing the position of cars for purposes of loading, unloading, or weighing; placing locomotives and cars for repair or storage; or moving of rail equipment in connection with work service that does not constitute a train movement.

Tourist train operation   means a tourist, scenic, historic, or excursion train operation.

Tourist train operation that is not part of the general railroad system of transportation   means a tourist, scenic, historic, or excursion train operation conducted only on track used exclusively for that purpose (i.e., there is no freight, intercity passenger, or commuter passenger railroad operation on the track).

Trailing tons   means the sum of the gross weights—expressed in tons-of the cars and the locomotives in a train that are not providing propelling power to the train.

Train   means one or more locomotives coupled with or without cars, except during switching service.

Train or yard crew   means one or more railroad employees assigned a controlling locomotive, under the charge and control of one crew member; called to perform service covered by Section 2 of the Hours of Service Act; involved with the train or yard movement of railroad rolling equipment they are to work with as an operating crew; reporting and working together as a unit that remains in close contact if more than one employee; and subject to the railroad operating rules and program of operational tests and inspections required in §§ 217.9 and 217.11 of this chapter.

Unit freight train   means a freight train composed of cars carrying a single type of commodity.

Utility employee   means a railroad employee assigned to and functioning as a temporary member of a train or yard crew whose primary function is to assist the train or yard crew in the assembly, disassembly or classification of rail cars, or operation of trains (subject to the conditions set forth in § 218.22 of this chapter).

Worker   means any railroad employee assigned to inspect, test, repair, or service railroad rolling equipment, or their components, including brake systems. Members of train and yard crews are excluded except when assigned such work on railroad rolling equipment that is not part of the train or yard movement they have been called to operate (or been assigned to as “utility employees”). Utility employees assigned to and functioning as temporary members of a specific train or yard crew (subject to the conditions set forth in § 218.22 of this chapter), are excluded only when so assigned and functioning.

Note:

Servicing does not include supplying cabooses, locomotives, or passenger cars with items such as ice, drinking water, tools, sanitary supplies, stationery, or flagging equipment.

Testing does not include (i) visual observations made by an employee positioned on or alongside a caboose, locomotive, or passenger car; or (ii) marker inspections made in accordance with the provisions of § 221.16(b) of this chapter.

[58 FR 43292, Aug. 16, 1993, as amended at 60 FR 11049, Mar. 1, 1995; 73 FR 8498, Feb. 13, 2008; 89 FR 25108, Apr. 9, 2024]

§ 218.7 Waivers.

(a) A railroad may petition the Federal Railroad Administration for a waiver of compliance with any requirement prescribed in this part.

(b) Each petition for a waiver under this section must be filed in the manner and contain the information required by part 211 of this chapter.

(c) If the Administrator finds that waiver of compliance is in the public interest and is consistent with railroad safety, he may grant the waiver subject to any conditions he deems necessary. Notice of each waiver granted, including a statement of the reasons, therefore, is published in the Federal Register. 

§ 218.9 Civil penalty.

Any person (an entity of any type covered under 1 U.S.C. 1, including but not limited to the following: a railroad; a manager, supervisor, official, or other employee or agent of a railroad; any owner, manufacturer, lessor, or lessee of railroad equipment, track, or facilities; any independent contractor providing goods or services to a railroad; and any employee of such owner, manufacturer, lessor, lessee, or independent contractor) who violates any requirement of this part or causes the violation of any such requirement is subject to a civil penalty of at least $1,086 and not more than $35,516 per violation, except that: Penalties may be assessed against individuals only for willful violations, and, where a grossly negligent violation or a pattern of repeated violations has created an imminent hazard of death or injury to persons, or has caused death or injury, a penalty not to exceed $142,063 per violation may be assessed. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. See FRA's website at www.fra.dot.gov for a statement of agency civil penalty policy.

[53 FR 28599, July 28, 1988]

Editorial Note

Editorial Note:

For Federal Register citations affecting § 218.9, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the Finding Aids section of the printed volume and at www.govinfo.gov.

§ 218.11 Filing, testing, and instruction.

The operating rules prescribed in this part, and any additional or more stringent requirements issued by a railroad in relation to the operating rules prescribed in this part, shall be subject to the provisions of part 217 of this chapter, Railroad Operating Rules: Filing, Testing, and Instruction.

Subpart B—Blue Signal Protection of Workers

§ 218.21 Scope.

This subpart prescribes minimum requirements for the protection of railroad employees engaged in the inspection, testing, repair, and servicing of rolling equipment whose activities require them to work on, under, or between such equipment and subjects them to the danger of personal injury posed by any movement of such equipment.

§ 218.22 Utility employee.

(a) A utility employee shall be subject to the Hours of Service Act, and the requirements for training and testing, control of alcohol and drug use, and hours of service record keeping provided for in parts 217, 219, and 228 of this chapter.

(b) A utility employee shall perform service as a member of only one train or yard crew at any given time. Service with more than one crew may be sequential, but not concurrent.

(c) A utility employee may be assigned to and serve as a member of a train or yard crew without the protection otherwise required by subpart B of part 218 of this chapter only under the following conditions:

(1) The train or yard crew is assigned a controlling locomotive that is under the actual control of the assigned locomotive engineer of that crew;

(2) The locomotive engineer is in the cab of the controlling locomotive, or, while the locomotive is stationary be replaced in the cab by another member of the same crew;

(3) The utility employee established communication with the crew by contacting the designated crew member on arriving at the train (as defined for the purpose of this section as one or more locomotives coupled, with or without cars) and before commencing any duties with the crew.

(4) Before each utility employee commences duties, the designated crew member shall provide notice to each crew member of the presence and identity of the utility employee. Once all crew members have acknowledged this notice, the designated crew member shall advise the utility employee that he or she is authorized to work as part of the crew. Thereafter, communication shall be maintained in such a manner that each member of the train or yard crew understands the duties to be performed and whether those duties will cause any crew member to go on, under, or between the rolling equipment; and

(5) The utility employee is performing one or more of the following functions: Set or release handbrakes; couple or uncouple air hoses and other electrical or mechanical connections; prepare rail cars for coupling; set wheel blocks or wheel chains; conduct air brake test to include cutting air brake components in or out and position retaining valves; inspect, test, install, remove or replace a rear end marking device or end of train device; or change batteries on the rear end marking device or the end of train device if the change may be accomplished without the use of tools. Under all other circumstances, a utility employee working on, under, or between railroad rolling equipment must be provided with blue signal protection in accordance with §§ 218.23 through 218.30 of this part.

(d) When the utility employee has ceased all work in connection with that train and is no longer on, under, or between the equipment, the utility employee shall notify the designated crew member. The designated crew member shall then provide notice to each crew member that the utility employee is being released from the crew. Once each crew member has acknowledged the notice, the designated crew member shall then notify the utility employee that he is released from the train or yard crew.

(e) Communications required by § 218.22(c)(4) and (d) shall be conducted between the utility employee and the designated crew member. This communications shall be conducted either through direct verbal contact, by radio in compliance with part 220 of this chapter, or by oral telecommunication of equivalent integrity.

(f) No more than three utility employees may be attached to one train or yard crew at any given time.

(g) Any railroad employee who is not assigned to a train or yard crew, or authorized to work with a crew under the conditions set forth by paragraph (b) of this section, is a worker required to be provided blue signal protection in accordance with §§ 218.23 through 218.30 of this part.

(h) Nothing in this section shall affect the alternative form of protection specified in § 221.16 of this chapter with respect to inspection of rear end marking devices.

[58 FR 43293, Aug. 16, 1993, as amended at 60 FR 11050, Mar. 1, 1995; 85 FR 80569, Dec. 11, 2020]

§ 218.23 Blue signal display.

(a) Blue signals displayed in accordance with § 218.25, 218.27, or 218.29 signify that workers are on, under, or between rolling equipment. When so displayed—

(1) The equipment may not be coupled to;

(2) The equipment may not be moved, except as provided for in § 218.29;

(3) Other rolling equipment may not be placed on the same track so as to reduce or block the view of a blue signal, except as provided for in § 218.29 (a), (b) and (c); and

(4) Rolling equipment may not pass a displayed blue signal.

(b) Blue signals must be displayed in accordance with § 218.25, 218.27, or 218.29 by each craft or group of workers prior to their going on, under, or between rolling equipment and may only be removed by the same craft or group that displayed them.

§ 218.24 One-person crew.

(a) An engineer working alone as a one-person crew shall not perform duties on, under, or between rolling equipment, without blue signal protection that complies with § 218.27 or § 218.29, unless the duties to be performed are listed in § 218.22(c)(5) and the following protections are provided:

(1) Each locomotive in the locomotive engineer's charge is either:

(i) Coupled to the train or other railroad rolling equipment to be assisted; or

(ii) Stopped a sufficient distance from the train or rolling equipment to ensure a separation of at least 50 feet; and

(2) Before a controlling locomotive is left unattended, the one-member crew shall secure the locomotive as follows:

(i) The throttle is in the IDLE position;

(ii) The generator field switch is in the OFF position;

(iii) The reverser handle is removed (if so equipped);

(iv) The isolation switch is in the ISOLATE position;

(v) The locomotive independent (engine) brake valve is fully applied;

(vi) The hand brake on the controlling locomotive is fully applied (if so equipped); and

(vii) A bright orange engineer's tag (a tag that is a minimum of three by eight inches with the words ASSIGNED LOCOMOTIVE—DO NOT OPERATE) is displayed on the control stand of the controlling locomotive.

(b) When assisting another train or yard crew with the equipment the other crew was assigned to operate, a single engineer must communicate directly, either by radio in compliance with part 220 of this chapter or by oral telecommunication of equivalent integrity, with the crew of the train to be assisted. The crews of both trains must notify each other in advance of all moves to be made by their respective equipment. Prior to attachment or detachment of the assisting locomotive(s), the crew of the train to be assisted must inform the single engineer that the train is secured against movement. The crew of the train to be assisted must not move the train or permit the train to move until authorized by the single engineer.

[60 FR 11050, Mar. 1, 1995]

Effective Date Note

Effective Date Note:

Section 218.24 was added at 60 FR 11050, Mar. 1, 1995, effective May 15, 1995. At 60 FR 30469, June 9, 1995, § 218.24 was suspended, effective May 15, 1995.

§ 218.25 Workers on a main track.

When workers are on, under, or between rolling equipment on a main track:

(a) A blue signal must be displayed at each end of the rolling equipment; and

(b) If the rolling equipment to be protected includes one or more locomotives, a blue signal must be attached to the controlling locomotive at a location where it is readily visible to the engineman or operator at the controls of that locomotive.

(c) When emergency repair work is to be done on, under, or between a locomotive or one or more cars coupled to a locomotive, and blue signals are not available, the engineman or operator must be notified and effective measures must be taken to protect the workers making the repairs.

[44 FR 2175, Jan. 10, 1979, as amended at 48 FR 6123, Feb. 10, 1983]

§ 218.27 Workers on track other than main track.

When workers are on, under, or between rolling equipment on track other than main track—

(a) A blue signal must be displayed at or near each manually operated switch providing access to that track;

(b) Each manually operated switch providing access to the track on which the equipment is located must be lined against movement to that track and locked with an effective locking device; and

(c) The person in charge of the workers must have notified the operator of any remotely controlled switch that work is to be performed and have been informed by the operator that each remotely controlled switch providing access to the track on which the equipment is located has been lined against movement to that track and locked as prescribed in § 218.30.

(d) If rolling equipment requiring blue signal protection as provided for in this section is on a track equipped with one or more crossovers, both switches of each crossover must be lined against movement through the crossover toward that rolling equipment, and the switch of each crossover that provides access to the rolling equipment must be protected in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b), or (c) of this section.

(e) If the rolling equipment to be protected includes one or more locomotives, a blue signal must be attached to the controlling locomotive at a location where it is readily visible to the engineman or operator at the controls of that locomotive.

§ 218.29 Alternate methods of protection.

Instead of providing blue signal protection for workers in accordance with § 218.27, the following methods for blue signal protection may be used:

(a) When workers are on, under, or between rolling equipment in a locomotive servicing track area:

(1) A blue signal must be displayed at or near each switch providing entrance to or departure from the area;

(2) Each switch providing entrance to or departure from the area must be lined against movement to the area and locked with an effective locking device; and

(3) A blue signal must be attached to each controlling locomotive at a location where it is readily visible to the engineman or operator at the controls of that locomotive;

(4) If the speed within this area is restricted to not more than 5 miles per hour a derail, capable of restricting access to that portion of a track within the area on which the rolling equipment is located, will fulfill the requirements of a manually operated switch in compliance with paragraph (a)(2) of this section when positioned at least 50 feet from the end of the equipment to be protected by the blue signal, when locked in a derailing position with an effective locking device, and when a blue signal is displayed at the derail;

(5) A locomotive may be moved onto a locomotive servicing area track after the blue signal has been removed from the entrance switch to the area. However, the locomotive must be stopped short of coupling to another locomotive;

(6) A locomotive may be moved off of a locomotive servicing area track after the blue signal has been removed from the controlling locomotive to be moved and from the area departure switch;

(7) If operated by an authorized employee under the direction of the person in charge of the workers, a locomotive protected by blue signals may be repositioned within this area after the blue signal has been removed from the locomotive to be repositioned and the workers on the affected track have been notified of the movement; and

(8) Blue signal protection removed for the movement of locomotives as provided in paragraphs (a) (5) and (6) of this section must be restored immediately after the locomotive has cleared the switch.

(b) When workers are on, under, or between rolling equipment in a car shop repair track area:

(1) A blue signal must be displayed at or near each switch providing entrance to or departure from the area; and

(2) Each switch providing entrance to or departure from the area must be lined against movement to the area and locked with an effective locking device;

(3) If the speed within this area is restricted to not more than 5 miles per hour, a derail capable of restricting access to that portion of a track within the area on which the rolling equipment is located will fulfill the requirements of a manually operated switch in compliance with paragraph (a)(2) of this section when positioned at least 50 feet from the end of the equipment to be protected by the blue signal, when locked in a derailing position with an effective locking device and when a blue signal is displayed at the derail;

(4) If operated by an authorized employee under the direction of the person in charge of the workemen, a car mover may be used to reposition rolling equipment within this area after workers on the affected track have been notified of the movement.

(c) Except as provided in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, when workers are on, under, or between rolling equipment on any track, other than a main track:

(1) A derail capable of restricting access to that portion of the track on which such equipment is located, will fulfill the requirements of a manually operated switch when positioned no less than 150 feet from the end so such equipment; and

(2) Each derail must be locked in a derailing position with an effective locking device and a blue signal must be displayed at each derail.

(d) When emergency repair work is to be done on, under, or between a locomotive or one or more cars coupled to a locomotive, and blue signals are not available, the engineman or operator at the controls of that locomotive must be notified and effective measures must be taken to protect the workers making the repairs.

[44 FR 2175, Jan. 10, 1979, as amended at 48 FR 6123, Feb. 10, 1983]

§ 218.30 Remotely controlled switches.

(a) After the operator of the remotely controlled switches has received the notification required by § 218.27(c), he must line each remotely controlled switch against movement to that track and apply an effective locking device to the lever, button, or other device controlling the switch before he may inform the employee in charge of the workers that protection has been provided.

(b) The operator may not remove the locking device unless he has been informed by the person in charge of the workers that it is safe to do so.

(c) The operator must maintain for 15 days a written record of each notification which contains the following information:

(1) The name and craft of the employee in charge who provided the notification;

(2) The number or other designation of the track involved;

(3) The date and time the operator notified the employee in charge that protection had been provided in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section; and

(4) The date and time the operator was informed that the work had been completed, and the name and craft of the employee in charge who provided this information.

[44 FR 2175, Jan. 10, 1979, as amended at 48 FR 6123, Feb. 10, 1983]

Subpart C—Protection of Trains and Locomotives

§ 218.31 Scope.

This subpart prescribes minimum operating rule requirements for the protection of railroad employees engaged in the operation of trains, locomotives and other rolling equipment.

[42 FR 5065, Jan. 27, 1977]

§ 218.35 Yard limits.

(a) After August 1, 1977, yard limits must be designated by—

(1) Yard limit signs, and

(2) Timetable, train orders, or special instructions.

(b) After August 1, 1977, each railroad must have in effect an operating rule which complies with the requirements set forth below:

(1) The main tracks within yard limits may be used, clearing the time an approaching designated class train is due to leave the nearest station where time is shown. In case of failure to clear the time of designated class trains, protection must be provided as § 218.37. In yard limits where main tracks are governed by block signal system rules, protection as prescribed by § 218.37 is not required.

(2) Trains and engines, except designated class trains, within yard limits must move prepared to stop within onehalf the range of vision but not exceeding 20 m.p.h. unless the main track is known to be clear by block signal indications.

(3) Within yard limits, movements against the current of traffic on the main tracks must not be made unless authorized and protected by train order, yardmaster, or other designated official and only under the operating restrictions prescribed in § 218.35(b)(2).

(c) Each railroad shall designate in the operating rule prescribed under paragraph (b) of this section the class or classes of trains which shall have superiority on the main track within yard limits.

[42 FR 5065, Jan. 27, 1977]

§ 218.37 Flag protection.

(a) After August 1, 1977, each railroad must have in effect an operating rule which complies with the requirements set forth below:

(1) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, flag protection shall be provided—

(i) When a train is moving on the main track at less than one-half the maximum authorized speed (including slow order limits) in that territory, flag protection against following trains on the same track must be provided by a crew member by dropping off single lighted fusees at intervals that do not exceed the burning time of the fusee.

(ii) When a train is moving on the main track at more than one-half the maximum authorized speed (including slow order limits) in that territory under circumstances in which it may be overtaken, crew members responsible for providing protection will take into consideration the grade, curvature of track, weather conditions, sight distance and relative speed of his train to following trains and will be governed accordingly in the use of fusees.

(iii) When a train stops on main track, flag protection against following trains on the same track must be provided as follows: A crew member with flagman's signals must immediately go back at least the distance prescribed by timetable or other instructions for the territory and display one lighted fusee. The crew member may then return one-half of the distance to the crew member's train where the crew member must remain until the crew member has stopped the approaching train or is recalled. When recalled, the crew member must leave one lighted fusee and while returning to the crew member's train, the crew member must also place single lighted fusees at intervals that do not exceed the burning time of the fusee. When the train departs, a crew member must leave one lighted fusee and until the train resumes speed not less than one-half the maximum authorized speed (including slow order limits) in that territory, the crew member must drop off single lighted fusees at intervals that do not exceed the burning time of the fusee.

(iv) When required by the railroad's operating rules, a forward crew member with flagman's signals must protect the front of the crew member's train against opposing movements by immediately going forward at least the distance prescribed by timetable or other instructions for the territory, displaying one lighted fusee, and remaining at that location until recalled.

(v) Whenever a crew member is providing flag protection, he must not permit other duties to interfere with the protection of his train.

(2) Flag protection against following trains on the same track is not required if—

(i) The rear of the train is protected by at least two block signals;

(ii) The rear of the train is protected by an absolute block;

(iii) The rear of the train is within interlocking limits; or

(iv) A train order specifies that flag protection is not required.

(v) A railroad operates only one train at any given time.

(b) Each railroad shall designate by timetable or other instruction for each territory the specific distance which a crew member providing flag protection must go out in order to provide adequate protection for his train.

(c) Whenever the use of fusees is prohibited by a Federal, State or local fire regulation, each railroad operating within that jurisdiction shall provide alternate operating procedures to assure full protection of trains in lieu of flag protection required by this section.

[42 FR 5065, Jan. 27, 1977, as amended at 42 FR 38362, July 28, 1977; 73 FR 8498, Feb. 13, 2008]

§ 218.39 Hump operations.

After June 30, 1984, each railroad that operates a remote control hump yard facility must have in effect an operating rule that adopts the following provisions in substance:

(a) When a train or engine service employee is required to couple an air hose or to adjust a coupling device and that activity will require that the employee place himself between pieces of rolling equipment located on a bowl track, the operator of any remotely controlled switch that provides access from the apex of the hump to the track on which the rolling equipment is located shall be notified;

(b) Upon such notification, the operator of such remotely controlled switch shall line it against movement to the affected bowl track and shall apply a locking or blocking device to the control for that switch; and

(c) The operator shall then notify the employee that the requested protection has been provided and shall remove the locking or blocking device only after being notified by the employee that protection is no longer required on that track.

(Sec. 202, 84 Stat. 971 (45 U.S.C. 431); sec. 1.49(m) of the regulations of the Secretary of Transportation (49 CFR 1.49(m))

[49 FR 6497, Feb. 22, 1984]

§ 218.41 Noncompliance with hump operations rule.

A person (including a railroad and any manager, supervisor, official, or other employee or agent of a railroad) who fails to comply with a railroad's operating rule issued pursuant to § 218.39 is subject to a penalty. See FRA's website at www.fra.dot.gov for a statement of agency civil penalty policy.

[84 FR 23734, May 23, 2019]

Subpart D—Prohibition Against Tampering With Safety Devices

Source:54 FR 5492, Feb. 3, 1989, unless otherwise noted.

§ 218.51 Purpose.

(a) The purpose of this subpart is to prevent accidents and casualties that can result from the operation of trains when safety devices intended to improve the safety of their movement have been disabled.

(b) This subpart does not prohibit intervention with safety devices that is permitted:

(1) Under the provisions of § 236.566 or § 236.567 of this chapter;

(2) Under the provisions of § 218.61 of this part; or

(3) Under the provisions of § 229.9 of this chapter, provided that when a locomotive is being operated under the provision of § 229.9(b) a designated officer has been notified of the defective alerter or deadman pedal at the first available point of communication.

[54 FR 5492, Feb. 3, 1989, as amended at 58 FR 36613, July 8, 1993]

§ 218.53 Scope and definitions.

(a) This subpart establishes standards of conduct for railroads and individuals who operate or permit to be operated locomotives equipped with one or more of the safety devices identified in paragraph (c) of this section.

(b) Disable  means to unlawfully render a device incapable of proper and effective action or to materially impair the functioning of that device.

(c) Safety Device  means any locomotive-mounted equipment used either to assure the locomotive engineer is alert, not physically incapacitated, and aware of and complying with the indications of a signal system or other operational control system, or a system used to record data concerning the operations of that locomotive or the train it is powering. See appendix C to this part for a statement of agency policy on this subject.

(d) The provisions in §§ 218.59 and 218.61 do not apply to locomotive-mounted image or audio recording equipment on freight locomotives.

[54 FR 5492, Feb. 3, 1989, as amended at 88 FR 70760, Oct. 12, 2023]

§ 218.55 Tampering prohibited.

Any individual who willfully disables a safety device is subject to a civil penalty and to disqualification from performing safety-sensitive functions on a railroad if found unfit for such duties under the procedures provided for in 49 CFR part 209. See FRA's website at www.fra.dot.gov for a statement of agency civil penalty policy.

[84 FR 23734, May 23, 2019]

§ 218.57 Responsibilities of individuals.

Any individual who knowingly operates a train, or permits it to be operated, when the controlling locomotive of that train is equipped with a disabled safety device, is subject to a civil penalty and to disqualification from performing safety-sensitive functions on a railroad if found to be unfit for such duties. See appendix B to this part for a statement of agency enforcement policy concerning violations of this section. See FRA's website at www.fra.dot.gov for a statement of agency civil penalty policy.

[84 FR 23734, May 23, 2019]

§ 218.59 Responsibilities of railroads.

Any railroad that operates a train when the controlling locomotive of a train is equipped with a disabled safety device is subject to a civil penalty. See FRA's website at www.fra.dot.gov for a statement of agency civil penalty policy.

[84 FR 23734, May 23, 2019]

§ 218.61 Authority to deactivate safety devices.

(a) For the purpose of this chapter, it is lawful to temporarily render a safety device incapable of proper or effective action or to materially impair its function if this action is taken as provided for in paragraph (b) or (c) of this section.

(b) If a locomotive is equipped with a device to assure that the operator is alert or not physically incapacitated, that device may be deactivated when:

(1) The locomotive is not the controlling locomotive;

(2) The locomotive is performing switching operations and not hauling cars in a manner that constitutes a train movement under part 232 of this chapter:

(3) The locomotive is dead-in-tow; or

(4) The locomotive is a mid-train slave unit being controlled by radio from a remote location.

(c) If a locomotive in commuter or intercity passenger service is equipped with a device to record data concerning the operation of that locomotive or the train it is powering, that device may be deactivated only under the provisions of § 229.135 of this chapter. Inward- and outward-facing image recording devices on commuter or intercity passenger locomotives may be deactivated only under the provisions of § 229.136 of this chapter. This section does not apply to inward- or outward-facing image recording devices that are installed on freight locomotives.

[54 FR 5492, Feb. 3, 1989, as amended at 58 FR 36613, July 8, 1993; 88 FR 70760, Oct. 12, 2023]

Subpart E—Protection of Occupied Camp Cars

Source:54 FR 39545, Sept. 27, 1989, unless otherwise noted.

§ 218.71 Purpose and scope.

This subpart prescribes minimum requirements governing protection of camp cars that house railroad employees. The rule does not apply to such cars while they are in a train.

§ 218.73 Warning signal display.

(a) Warning signals, i.e., a white disk with the words “Occupied Camp Car” in black lettering during daylight hours and an illuminated white signal at night, displayed in accordance with § 218.75, § 218.77, or § 218.79 signify that employees are in, around, or in the vicinity of camp cars. Once the signals have been displayed—

(1) The camp cars may not be moved for coupling to other rolling equipment or moved to another location;

(2) Rolling equipment may not be placed on the same track so as to reduce or block the view of a warning signal; and

(3) Rolling equipment may not pass a warning signal.

(b) Warning signals indicating the presence of occupied camp cars, displayed in accordance with §§ 218.75 and 218.79, shall be displayed by a designated occupant of the camp cars or that person's immediate supervisor. The signal(s) shall be displayed as soon as such cars are placed on the track, and such signals may only be removed by those same individuals prior to the time the cars are moved to another location.

§ 218.75 Methods of protection for camp cars.

When camp cars requiring protection are on either main track or track other than main track:

(a) A warning signal shall be displayed at or near each switch providing access to that track;

(b) The person in charge of the camp car occupants shall immediately notify the person responsible for directing train movements on that portion of the railroad where the camp cars are being parked;

(c) Once notified of the presence of camp cars and their location on main track or other than main track, the person responsible for directing train movements on that portion of the railroad where the camp cars are being parked shall take appropriate action to alert affected personnel to the presence of the cars;

(d) Each manually operating switch providing access to track on which the camp cars are located shall be lined against movement to that track and secured with an effective locking device and spiked; and

(e) Each remotely controlled switch providing access to the track on which the camp cars are located shall be protected in accordance with § 218.77.

§ 218.77 Remotely controlled switches.

(a) After the operator of the remotely controlled switch is notified that a camp car is to be placed on a particular track, he shall line such switch against movement to that track and apply an effective locking device applied to the lever, button, or other device controlling the switch before informing the person in charge of the camp car occupants that protection has been provided.

(b) The operator may not remove the locking device until informed by the person in charge of the camp car occupants that protection is no longer required.

(c) The operator shall maintain for 15 days a written record of each notification that contains the following information:

(1) The name and craft of the employee in charge who provided the notification;

(2) The number or other designation of the track involved;

(3) The date and time the operator notified the employee in charge that protection had been provided in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section; and

(4) The date and time the operator was informed that the work had been completed, and the name and craft of the employee in charge who provided this information.

(d) When occupied camp cars are parked on main track, a derail, capable of restricting access to that portion of the track on which such equipment is located, shall be positioned no less than 150 feet from the end of such equipment and locked in a derailing position with an effective locking device, and a warning signal must be displayed at the derail.

§ 218.79 Alternative methods of protection.

Instead of providing protection for occupied camp cars in accordance with § 218.75 or § 218.77, the following methods of protection may be used:

(a) When occupied camp cars are on track other than main track:

(1) A warning signal must be displayed at or near each switch providing access to or from the track;

(2) Each switch providing entrance to or departure from the area must be lined against movement to the track and locked with an effective locking device; and

(3) If the speed within this area is restricted to not more than five miles per hour, a derail, capable of restricting access to that portion of track on which the camp cars are located, will fulfill the requirements of a manually operated switch in compliance with paragraph (a)(2) of this section when positioned at least 50 feet from the end of the camp cars to be protected by the warning signal, when locked in a derailing position with an effective locking device, and when a warning signal is displayed at the derail.

(b) Except as provided in paragraph (a) of this section, when occupied camp cars are on track other than main track:

(1) A derail, capable of restricting access to that portion of the track on which such equipment is located, will fulfill the requirements of a manually operated switch when positioned no less than 150 feet from the end of such equipment; and

(2) Each derail must be locked in a derailing position with an effective locking device and a warning signal must be displayed at each derail.

§ 218.80 Movement of occupied camp cars.

Occupied cars may not be humped or flat switched unless coupled to a locomotive.

Subpart F—Handling Equipment, Switches, and Fixed Derails

Source:73 FR 8498, Feb. 13, 2008, unless otherwise noted.

§ 218.91 Purpose and scope.

(a) The purpose of this subpart is to prevent accidents and casualties that can result from the mishandling of equipment, switches, and fixed derails.

(b) This subpart prescribes minimum operating rule requirements for the handling of equipment, switches, and fixed derails. Each railroad may prescribe additional or more stringent requirements in its operating rules, timetables, timetable special instructions, and other instructions.

§ 218.93 Definitions.

As used in this subpart—

Clearance point   means the location near a turnout beyond which it is unsafe for passage on an adjacent track(s). Where a person is permitted by a railroad's operating rules to ride the side of a car, a clearance point shall accommodate a person riding the side of a car.

Correspondence of crossover switches   means both crossover switches are lined for the crossover or both are lined for the straight tracks.

Crossover   means, for purposes of this subpart only, a track connection between two adjacent, but not necessarily parallel, tracks, consisting of two switches, which is intended to be used primarily for the purpose of crossing over from one track to another.

Departure track   means a track located in a classification yard where rolling equipment is placed and made ready for an outgoing train movement.

Employee   means an individual who is engaged or compensated by a railroad or by a contractor to a railroad to perform any of the duties defined in this subpart.

Foul or fouling a track   means rolling equipment or on-track maintenance-of-way equipment is located such that the end of the equipment is between the clearance point and the switch points leading to the track on which the equipment is standing.

FRA   means the Federal Railroad Administration.

Hand-operated switch   means any type of switch when operated by manual manipulation. For purposes of this subpart, a hand-operated switch does not include switches operated by push button or radio control when such switch is protected by distant switch indicators, switch point indicators, or other visual or audio verification that the switch points are lined for the intended route and fit properly.

Highway-rail grade crossing   means, for purposes of this subpart only, an at-grade crossing where a public highway, road, street, or private roadway, including associated sidewalks and pathways, crosses one or more railroad tracks at grade, and is identified by a U.S. DOT National Highway-Rail Grade Crossing Inventory Number, or is marked by crossbucks, stop signs, or other appropriate signage indicating the presence of an at-grade crossing.

Industry track   means a switching track, or series of tracks, serving the needs of a commercial industry other than a railroad.

Locomotive   means, for purposes of this subpart only, a piece of on-track equipment (other than specialized roadway maintenance equipment or a dual purpose vehicle operating in accordance with § 240.104(a)(2) of this chapter):

(1) With one or more propelling motors designed for moving other equipment;

(2) With one or more propelling motors designed to carry freight or passenger traffic or both; or

(3) Without propelling motors but with one or more control stands.

Pedestrian crossing   means a separate designated sidewalk or pathway where pedestrians, but not vehicles, cross railroad tracks. Sidewalk crossings contiguous with, or separate but adjacent to, highway-rail grade crossings, are presumed to be part of the highway-rail grade crossings and are not considered pedestrian crossings.

Qualified   means that a person has successfully completed all instruction, training, and examination programs required by the railroad and this subpart and that the person, therefore, has actual knowledge or may reasonably be expected to have knowledge of the subject on which the person is expected to be competent.

Remote control operator   means a locomotive engineer, as defined in § 240.7 of this chapter, certified by a railroad to operate remote control locomotives pursuant to § 240.107 of this chapter.

Remote control zone   means one or more tracks within defined limits designated in the timetable special instructions, or other railroad publication, within which remote control locomotives, under certain circumstances specified in this part, may be operated without an employee assigned to protect the pull-out end of the remote control movement, i.e., the end on which the locomotive is located.

Roadway maintenance activity   means any work limited to the duties prescribed for a roadway worker by definition in this section, including movement of on-track maintenance-of-way equipment other than locomotives.

Roadway worker   means any employee of a railroad, or of a contractor to a railroad, whose duties include inspection, construction, maintenance or repair of railroad track, bridges, roadway, signal and communication systems, electric traction systems, roadway facilities or roadway maintenance machinery on or near track or with the potential of fouling a track, and flagmen and watchmen/lookouts as defined in § 214.7 of this chapter.

Roadway worker in charge   means a roadway worker who is qualified in accordance with § 214.353 of this chapter for the purpose of establishing on-track safety for roadway work groups.

Siding   means an auxiliary track, adjacent and connected to a main track, used for meeting or passing trains.

Signaled siding   means a siding within traffic control system (TCS) territory or within interlocking limits where a signal indication authorizes the siding's use.

Switchtender   means a qualified employee assigned to handle switches at a specific location.

Track is clear   means:

(1) The portion of the track to be used for the intended movement is unoccupied by rolling equipment, on-track maintenance-of-way equipment, and conflicting on-track movements;

(2) Intervening public highway-rail grade crossings, private highway-rail grade crossings outside the physical confines of a railroad yard, pedestrian crossings outside of the physical confines of a railroad yard, and yard access crossings are protected as follows:

(i) Crossing gates are in the fully lowered position, and are not known to be malfunctioning; or

(ii) A designated and qualified employee is stationed at the crossing and has the ability to communicate with trains; or

(iii) At crossings equipped only with flashing lights or passive warning devices, when it is clearly seen that no traffic is approaching or stopped at the crossing and the leading end of the movement over the crossing does not exceed 15 miles per hour;

(3) Intervening switches and fixed derails are properly lined for the intended movement; and

(4) The portion of the track to be used for the intended movement has sufficient room to contain the rolling equipment being shoved or pushed.

Yard access crossing   means a private highway-rail grade crossing that is located within the physical confines of a railroad yard and is either:

(1) Open to unrestricted public access; or

(2) Open to persons other than railroad employees going about their normal duties, e.g., business guests or family members.

[73 FR 8498, Feb. 13, 2008, as amended at 73 FR 33902, June 16, 2008; 89 FR 25108, Apr. 9, 2024]

§ 218.95 Instruction, training, and examination.

(a) Program.  Beginning January 1, 2009, each railroad shall maintain a written program of instruction, training, and examination of employees for compliance with operating rules implementing the requirements of this subpart to the extent these requirements are pertinent to the employee's duties. If all requirements of this subpart are satisfied, a railroad may consolidate any portion of the instruction, training or examination required by this subpart with the program of instruction required under § 217.11 of this chapter. An employee who successfully completes all instruction, training, and examination required by this written program shall be considered qualified.

(1) The written program of instruction, training, and examination shall address the requirements of this subpart, as well as consequences of noncompliance.

(2) The written program of instruction, training, and examination shall include procedures addressing how the railroad qualifies employees in any technology necessary to accomplish work subject to the requirements of this subpart. Such procedures shall include, but are not limited to, those which explain:

(i) The purpose for using the technology;

(ii) How an employee will be expected to use the technology;

(iii) How to detect malfunctioning equipment or deviations from proper procedures;

(iv) How to respond when equipment malfunctions or deviations from proper procedures are detected; and

(v) How to prevent unintentional interference with the proper functioning of the technology.

(3) Implementation schedule for employees, generally.  Each employee performing duties subject to the requirements in this subpart shall be initially qualified prior to July 1, 2009.

(4) Beginning July 1, 2009, no employee shall perform work requiring compliance with the operating rules implementing the requirements of this subpart unless qualified on these rules within the previous three years.

(5) The records of successful completion of instruction, examination and training required by this section shall document qualification of employees under this subpart.

(b) Written records documenting successful completion of instruction, training, and examination of each employee required by this subpart shall be retained at its system headquarters and at the division headquarters for each division where the employee is assigned for three calendar years after the end of the calendar year to which they relate and made available to representatives of the FRA for inspection and copying during normal business hours. Each railroad to which this part applies is authorized to retain a program, or any records maintained to prove compliance with such a program, by electronic recordkeeping in accordance with §§ 217.9(g) and 217.11(c) of this chapter.

(c) Upon review of the program of instruction, training, and examination required by this section, the Associate Administrator for Safety may, for cause stated, disapprove the program. Notification of such disapproval shall be made in writing and specify the basis for the disapproval decision. If the Associate Administrator for Safety disapproves the program,

(1) The railroad has 35 days from the date of the written notification of such disapproval to:

(i) Amend its program and submit it to the Associate Administrator for Safety for approval; or

(ii) Provide a written response in support of the program to the Associate Administrator for Safety, who informs the railroad of FRA's final decision in writing; and

(2) A failure to submit the program with the necessary revisions to the Associate Administrator for Safety in accordance with this paragraph will be considered a failure to implement a program under this part.

[73 FR 8498, Feb. 13, 2008, as amended at 73 FR 33902, June 16, 2008]

§ 218.97 Good faith challenge procedures.

(a) Employee responsibility.  An employee shall inform the railroad or employer whenever the employee makes a good faith determination that the employee has been directed to either take actions that would violate FRA regulations regarding the handling of equipment, switches, and fixed derails as required by this subpart, or to take actions that would violate the railroad's operating rules implementing the requirements of this subpart.

(b) General procedures.  Each railroad or employer is responsible for the training of and compliance by its employees with the requirements of this subpart.

(1) Each railroad or employer shall adopt and implement written procedures which guarantee each employee the right to challenge in good faith whether the procedures that will be used to accomplish a specific task comply with the requirements of this subpart or any operating rule relied upon to fulfill the requirements of this subpart. Each railroad or employer's written procedures shall provide for prompt and equitable resolution of challenges made in accordance with this subpart.

(2) The written procedures required by this section shall indicate that the good faith challenge described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section is not intended to abridge any rights or remedies available to the employee under a collective bargaining agreement, or any Federal law including, but not limited to, 29 U.S.C. 651 et seq., 6 U.S.C. 1142, or 49 U.S.C. 20109.

(3) Each affected employee shall be instructed on the written procedures required by this paragraph as part of the training prescribed by § 217.11 of this chapter.

(4) A copy of the current written procedures shall be provided to each affected employee and made available for inspection and copying by representatives of the FRA during normal business hours.

(c) The written procedures shall—

(1) Grant each employee the right to challenge any directive which, based on the employee's good faith determination, would cause the employee to violate any requirement of this subpart or any operating rule relied upon to fulfill the requirements of this subpart;

(2) Provide that the railroad or employer shall not require the challenging employee to comply with the directive until the challenge resulting from the good faith determination is resolved;

(3) Provide that the railroad or employer may require the challenging employee to perform tasks unrelated to the challenge until the challenge is resolved;

(4) Provide that the railroad or employer may direct an employee, other than the challenging employee, to perform the challenged task prior to the challenge being resolved as long as this other employee is informed of the challenge and does not also make a good faith determination that the challenged task would violate FRA regulations regarding the handling of equipment, switches, and fixed derails as required in this subpart, or a railroad's operating rules implementing the requirements of this subpart;

(5) Provide that a challenge may be resolved by:

(i) A railroad or employer officer's acceptance of the employee's request;

(ii) An employee's acceptance of the directive;

(iii) An employee's agreement to a compromise solution acceptable to the person issuing the directive; or

(iv) As further determined under paragraph (d) of this section.

(d) In the event that the challenge cannot be resolved because the person issuing the directive determines that the employee's challenge has not been made in good faith or there is no reasonable alternative to the direct order, the written procedures shall:

(1) Provide for immediate review by at least one officer of the railroad or employer, except for each railroad with less than 400,000 total employee work hours annually. This immediate review shall:

(i) Not be conducted by the person issuing the challenged directive, or that person's subordinate; and

(ii) Provide that a challenge may be resolved by using the same options available for resolving the challenge as the initial officer as well as the option described in paragraph (d)(2) of this section, except that the reviewing officer's decision shall not be subject to further immediate review, unless provided for in the railroad's or employer's written procedures;

(2) Provide that if the officer making the railroad's or employer's final decision concludes that the challenged directive would not cause the employee to violate any requirement of this subpart or the railroad's or employer's operating rule relied upon to fulfill the requirements of this subpart and directs the employee to perform the challenged directive, the officer shall further explain to the employee that Federal law may protect the employee from retaliation if the employee refuses to do the work and if the employee's refusal is a lawful, good faith act;

(3) Provide that the employee be afforded an opportunity to document electronically or in writing any protest to the railroad or employer's final decision before the tour of duty is complete. The employee shall be afforded the opportunity to retain a copy of the protest;

(4) Provide that the employee, upon written request, has a right to further review by a designated railroad or employer officer, within 30 days after the expiration of the month during which the challenge occurred, for the purpose of verifying the proper application of the regulation, law, procedure or rule in question. The verification decision shall be made in writing to the employee.

(e) Recordkeeping and record retention. (1) A copy of the written procedures required by this section shall be retained at the employer or railroad's system headquarters and at each division headquarters, and made available to representatives of the FRA for inspection and copying during normal business hours.

(2) A copy of any written good faith challenge verification decision, made in accordance with paragraph (d)(4) of this section, shall be retained at the employer or railroad's system headquarters and at the division headquarters to which the employee was working when the challenge was initiated, and made available to representatives of the FRA for inspection and copying during normal business hours for at least one calendar year after expiration of the year during which the decision was issued.

(3) Each employer or railroad to which this subpart applies is authorized to retain by electronic recordkeeping the information prescribed in this subpart in accordance with the electronic recordkeeping standards set forth in § 217.9(g)(1) through (5) of this chapter.

§ 218.99 Shoving or pushing movements.

(a) (1) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with an operating rule which complies with the requirements of this section. When any person including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee violates any requirement of an operating rule which complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(2) The following requirements for shoving or pushing movements do not apply to rolling equipment intentionally shoved or pushed to permit the rolling equipment to roll without power attached, i.e., free rolling equipment, during switching service activities known as kicking, humping, or dropping cars.

(b) General movement requirements —(1) Job briefing.  Rolling equipment shall not be shoved or pushed until the locomotive engineer participating in the move has been briefed by the employee who will direct the move. The job briefing shall include the means of communication to be used between the locomotive engineer and the employee directing the move and how point protection will be provided.

(2) No unrelated tasks.  During the shoving or pushing movement, the employee directing the movement shall not engage in any task unrelated to the oversight of the shoving or pushing movement.

(3) Point protection.  When rolling equipment or a lite locomotive train with two or more locomotives that is operated from a single control stand is shoved or pushed, point protection shall be provided by a crewmember or other qualified employee by:

(i) Visually determining that the track is clear. The determination that the track is clear may be made with the aid of monitored cameras or other technological means, provided that it and the procedures for use provide an equivalent level of protection to that of a direct visual determination by a crewmember or other qualified employee properly positioned to make the observation as prescribed in this section and appendix D to this part; and

(ii) Giving signals or instructions necessary to control the movement.

(c) Additional requirements for remote control movements.  All remote control movements are considered shoving or pushing movements, except when the remote control operator controlling the movement is riding the leading end of the leading locomotive in a position to visually determine conditions in the direction of movement. In addition to the other requirements of this section,

(1) When initiating a remote control shoving or pushing movement:

(i) The remote control operator shall visually determine the direction the equipment moves; or

(ii) A member of the crew shall visually determine the direction the equipment moves and confirm the direction with the remote control operator. If no confirmation is received, the movement shall be immediately stopped; and

(2) If technology is relied upon, whether primarily or as a safeguard, to provide pull-out protection by preventing the movement from exceeding the limits of a remote control zone, the technology shall be demonstrated

(i) To be failsafe; or

(ii) To provide suitable redundancy to prevent unsafe failure.

(d) Remote control zone, exception to track is clear requirements.  After an initial track is clear determination has been made in an activated remote control zone, it is not necessary to make a new determination prior to each subsequent shoving or pushing movement provided that:

(1) The controlling locomotive of the remote control movement is on the leading end in the direction of movement, i.e., the movement occurs on the pull-out end;

(2) The remote control zone is not jointly occupied; and

(3) The initial determination was made by a crewmember of either:

(i) The remote control crew;

(ii) A relieved remote control crew who has transferred the remote control zone directly to the relieving crew; or

(iii) The last jointly occupying crew who directly communicates, i.e., not through a third party, to a remote control crewmember that the remote control zone is no longer jointly occupied and meets the requirements for track is clear.

(e) Operational exceptions.  A railroad does not need to comply with paragraphs (b) through (d) of this section in the following circumstances:

(1) Push-pull operations when operated from the leading end in the direction of movement, i.e., push mode;

(2) Shoving or pushing operations with a helper service train operation or distributed power locomotives assisting a train when the train is being operated from the leading end in the direction of movement;

(3) During the performance of roadway maintenance activity under the direct control of a roadway worker performing work in accordance with railroad operating rules specific to roadway workers; or

(4) When the leading end of a shoving movement is on a main track or signaled siding, under the following conditions:

(i) The train dispatcher gives authority or permission to make the movement and verifies that:

(A) Another movement or work authority is not in effect within the same or overlapping limits unless conflicting movements are protected; and

(B) A main track is not removed from service by a work authority within the same or overlapping limits;

(ii) Movement is limited to the train's authority;

(iii) Movement shall not be made into or within yard limits, restricted limits, drawbridges, or work authority limits;

(iv) Movement shall not enter or foul a highway-rail grade crossing or pedestrian crossing except when:

(A) Crossing gates are in the fully lowered position; or

(B) A designated and qualified employee is stationed at the crossing and has the ability to communicate with trains; or

(C) At crossings equipped only with flashing lights or passive warning devices, when it is clearly seen that no traffic is approaching or stopped at the crossing and the leading end of the movement over the crossing does not exceed 15 miles per hour; and

(v) Movement shall not be made into or within interlocking limits or controlled point limits unless the following conditions are met:

(A) The signal governing movement is more favorable than restricting aspect;

(B) Each signal governing movement into and through interlocking limits or controlled point limits shall be continuously observed by a member of that crew who is in a position to determine that the train's movement has occupied the circuit controlling that signal as evidenced by that signal assuming its most restrictive aspect; and

(C) The movement does not exceed the train's length.

(5) Shoving or pushing movements made in the direction of the circuited end of a designated departure track equipped with a shove light system, if all of the following conditions are met:

(i) The shove light system is demonstrated to be failsafe;

(ii) The shove light system is arranged to display a less favorable aspect when the circuited section of the track is occupied;

(iii) Written procedures are adopted and complied with that provide for a reliable means of determining track occupancy prior to commencing a shoving or pushing movement;

(iv) The track is designated in writing;

(v) The track is under the exclusive and continuous control of a yardmaster or other qualified employee;

(vi) The train crewmember or other qualified employee directing the shoving or pushing movement complies with the general movement requirements contained in paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section;

(vii) All remote control shoving or pushing movements comply with the requirements contained in paragraph (c)(1) of this section; and

(viii) The shove light system is continuously illuminated when the circuited section of the track is unoccupied.

[73 FR 8498, Feb. 13, 2008, as amended at 73 FR 33902, June 16, 2008; 89 FR 25108, Apr. 9, 2024]

§ 218.101 Leaving rolling and on-track maintenance-of-way equipment in the clear.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with an operating rule which complies with the requirements of this section. When any person including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee violates any requirement of an operating rule which complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) Rolling and on-track maintenance-of-way equipment shall not be left where it will foul a connecting track unless:

(1) The equipment is standing on a main track and a siding track switch that the equipment is fouling is lined for the main track on which the equipment is standing; or

(2) The equipment is standing on a siding and a main track switch that the equipment is fouling is lined for the siding on which the equipment is standing; or

(3) The equipment is standing on a yard switching lead track, and the yard track switch that the equipment is fouling is lined for the yard switching lead track on which the equipment is standing; or

(4) The equipment is on an industry track beyond the clearance point of the switch leading to the industry.

(c) Each railroad shall implement procedures that enable employees to identify clearance points and a means to identify locations where clearance points will not permit a person to safely ride on the side of a car.

§ 218.103 Hand-operated switches, including crossover switches.

(a) (1) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with an operating rule which complies with the requirements of this section. When any person including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee violates any requirement of an operating rule which complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(2) Each railroad shall specify minimum requirements necessary for an adequate job briefing.

(b) General.  Employees operating or verifying the position of a hand-operated switch shall:

(1) Conduct job briefings, before work is begun, each time a work plan is changed, and at completion of the work;

(2) Be qualified on the railroad's operating rules relating to the operation of the switch;

(3) Be individually responsible for the position of the switch in use;

(4) Visually determine that switches are properly lined for the intended route and that no equipment is fouling the switches;

(5) Visually determine that the points fit properly and the target, if so equipped, corresponds with the switch's position;

(6) After operating a switch and before making movements in either direction over the switch, ensure that the switch is secured from unintentional movement of the switch points;

(7) Ensure that a switch is not operated while rolling and on-track maintenance-of-way equipment is fouling the switch, or standing or moving over the switch; and

(8) After operating a switch, ensure that when not in use, each switch is locked, hooked, or latched, if so equipped.

(c) Rolling and on-track maintenance-of-way equipment shall not foul a track until all hand-operated switches connected with the movement are properly lined, or in the case of hand-operated switches designed and permitted to be trailed through, until the intended route is seen to be clear or the train has been granted movement authority. When a conflicting movement is approaching a hand-operated switch, the track shall not be fouled or the switch operated.

(d) When rolling and on-track maintenance-of-way equipment has entered a track, the hand-operated switch to that track shall not be lined away from the track until the equipment has passed the clearance point of the track.

§ 218.105 Additional operational requirements for hand-operated main track switches.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with an operating rule which complies with the requirements of this section. When any person including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee violates any requirement of an operating rule which complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) Designating switch position.  The normal position of a hand-operated main track switch shall be designated by the railroad in writing and the switch shall be lined and locked in that position when not in use except when:

(1) The train dispatcher directs otherwise with respect to the position of a hand-operated main track switch and the necessary protection is provided; or

(2) The hand-operated switch is left in the charge of a crewmember of another train, a switchtender, or a roadway worker in charge.

(c) Additional job briefing requirements for hand-operated main track switches. (1) Before a train or a train crew leaves the location where any hand-operated main track switch was operated, all crewmembers shall have verbal communication to confirm the position of the switch.

(2) In the case of exclusive track occupancy authority established under § 214.321, foul time under § 214.323, or train coordination under § 214.325, when a roadway worker qualified to operate hand-operated main track switches is granted permission by the roadway worker in charge to occupy or otherwise use the limits of the exclusive track occupancy, such employee receiving permission to occupy the working limits shall report the position of any such switches operated upon expiration of the authority limits to the roadway worker in charge or to a designated intermediary employee who shall convey the switch position to the roadway worker in charge.

(d) Releasing authority limits.  In non-signaled territory, before an employee releases the limits of a main track authority and a hand-operated switch is used to clear the main track, and, prior to departing the switch's location, the following conditions are required:

(1) The employee releasing the limits, after conducting a job briefing in accordance with this subpart, shall report to the train dispatcher that the hand-operated main track switch has been restored to its normal position and locked, unless the train dispatcher directs that the hand-operated main track switch be left lined and locked in the reverse position and the necessary protection is provided;

(2) If the report of the switch position is correct, the train dispatcher shall repeat the reported switch position information to the employee releasing the limits and ask whether that is correct; and

(3) The employee releasing the limits shall then confirm to the train dispatcher that this information is correct.

§ 218.107 Additional operational requirements for hand-operated crossover switches.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with an operating rule which complies with the requirements of this section. When any person including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee violates any requirement of an operating rule which complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) Hand-operated crossover switches, generally.  Both hand-operated switches of a crossover shall be properly lined before rolling and on-track maintenance-of-way equipment begins a crossover movement. A crossover movement shall be completed before either hand-operated crossover switch is restored to normal position.

(c) Correspondence of hand-operated crossover switches.  Hand-operated crossover switches shall be left in corresponding position except when:

(1) Used to provide blue signal protection under § 218.27 of this part; or

(2) Used for inaccessible track protection under § 214.327 of this chapter; or

(3) Performing maintenance, testing or inspection of crossover switches in traffic control system (TCS) territory; or

(4) One crew is using both tracks connected by the crossover during continuous switching operations.

§ 218.109 Hand-operated fixed derails.

(a) (1) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with an operating rule which complies with the requirements of this section. When any person including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee violates any requirement of an operating rule which complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(2) Each railroad shall specify minimum requirements necessary for an adequate job briefing.

(b) General. (1) The normal position of fixed derails is in the derailing position except as provided in part 218, subpart B of this chapter, or the railroad's operating rules or special instructions.

(2) Fixed derails shall be kept in the derailing position whether or not any rolling and on-track maintenance-of-way equipment is on the tracks they protect, except as provided in paragraph (b)(1) of this section or when changed to permit movement.

(3) Movement must not be made over a fixed derail in the derailing position.

(c) Employees operating or verifying the position of a fixed derail shall:

(1) Conduct job briefings, before work is begun, each time a work plan is changed, and at completion of the work;

(2) Be qualified on the railroad's operating rules relating to the operation of the derail;

(3) Be individually responsible for the position of the derail in use;

(4) Determine that the target, if so equipped, corresponds with the derail's position;

(5) Determine that the derail is secured by:

(i) Placing the throw lever in the latch stand, if so equipped;

(ii) Placing the lock or hook in the hasp, if so equipped; and

(iii) Testing such latches, locks or hooks; and

(6) Ensure that when not in use, derails are locked, hooked, or latched in the normal position if so equipped.

Subpart G—Train Crew Size Safety Requirements

Source:89 FR 25109, Apr. 9, 2024, unless otherwise noted.

§ 218.121 Purpose and scope.

(a) The purpose of this subpart is to ensure that each train is adequately staffed and has appropriate safeguards in place for safe train operations under all operating conditions.

(b) This subpart prescribes minimum requirements for the size of different train crews depending on the type of operation and operating conditions. The minimum crew size requirements reflect the safety risks posed to railroad employees, the public, and the environment. This subpart also prescribes minimum requirements for the location of a second crewmember on a moving train and promotes safe and effective teamwork. Each railroad may prescribe additional or more stringent requirements in its operating rules, timetables, timetable special instructions, and other instructions.

(c) The requirements in this subpart are not applicable to a train operation controlled by a remote control operator as defined in § 229.5 of this chapter.

§ 218.123 General train crew size safety requirements.

(a) General.  Each railroad shall comply with the requirements of this subpart and may adopt its own rules or practices consistent with the requirements of this subpart. If any person, as defined in § 218.9 (including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee), violates any requirement of a railroad rule or practice implementing the requirements of this subpart, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this subpart.

(b) Two-person train crew size safety requirement.  Except as provided in this subpart, each train shall be assigned a minimum of two crewmembers.

(c) Hazardous materials.  For the purposes of this paragraph (c), a tank car containing residue of a hazardous material as defined in § 171.8 of this title is not considered a loaded car. The exceptions in §§ 218.125 and 218.127 are not applicable, and the exceptions in § 218.129 apply as specified therein, when any train is:

(1) A high-hazard flammable train (HHFT) as defined in § 171.8 of this title;

(2) Transporting twenty (20) or more loaded tank cars or loaded intermodal portable tanks of any one or any combination of the hazardous materials identified in § 232.103(n)(6)(i)(B) of this chapter; or

(3) Transporting one or more car loads of rail-security sensitive materials (RSSM) as defined in § 1580.3 of this title.

(d) Location of crewmember(s) when the train is moving.  A train crewmember that is not operating the train may be located anywhere outside of the operating cab of the controlling locomotive when the train is moving if:

(1) The train crewmember is on the train, except when the train crewmember cannot perform the duties assigned without temporarily disembarking from the train;

(2) The train crewmember and a locomotive engineer in the cab of the controlling locomotive can directly communicate with each other;

(3) The train crewmember can continue to perform the duties assigned; and

(4) The location does not violate any Federal railroad safety law, regulation, or order.

§ 218.125 Specific passenger and tourist train operation exceptions to crew size safety requirements.

The requirements in this subpart are not applicable to the following passenger and tourist train operations that are operated with a one-person train crew:

(a) The train is a tourist train operation that is not part of the general railroad system of transportation;

(b) A tourist train operation that is part of the general system of transportation or a passenger operation in which:

(1) The locomotive engineer is moving cars empty of passengers; and

(2) Passengers will not board the train's cars until the crew conducts a safety briefing on the safe operation and use of the train's exterior side doors, in accordance with § 238.135 of this chapter;

(c) A tourist train operation that is part of the general system of transportation or a passenger operation involving a single self-propelled car or married-pair unit, e.g., an MU locomotive operation, where the locomotive engineer has direct access to the passenger seating compartment and (for passenger railroads subject to part 239 of this chapter) the passenger railroad's emergency preparedness plan for this operation is approved under § 239.201 of this chapter;

(d) A rapid transit operation in an urban area, i.e., an urban rapid transit system that is connected with the general railroad system of transportation under the following conditions:

(1) The operation is temporally separated from any conventional railroad operations;

(2) There is an FTA-approved and designated State Safety Oversight (SSO) Agency that is qualified to provide safety oversight; and

(3) The operator has an FTA/SSO-approved Public Transportation Agency Safety Plan in accordance with parts 673 and 674 of this title; or

(e) Each passenger train operation with a one-person train crew established before June 10, 2024 with an approved passenger train emergency preparedness plan under part 239 of this chapter for the operation.

§ 218.127 Specific freight train exceptions to crew size safety requirements.

The requirements in this subpart are not applicable to the following freight train operations that are operated with a one-person train crew:

(a) Mine load out, plant dumping, or similar operation exception.  A unit freight train:

(1) Being loaded or unloaded in an assembly line manner;

(2) Located on a track that is temporarily made inaccessible from the general railroad system of transportation;

(3) Moving at a maximum authorized speed of 10 miles per hour or less;

(4) Not requiring the one-person train crewmember to operate a hand-operated switch, fill out paperwork, or call signal indications during the loading or unloading process; and

(5) If the operation is overseen by another person, typically in a tower or on the ground, requiring that person to have the capability of communicating with the one-person train crewmember operating the train.

(b) [Reserved]

§ 218.129 Conditional exceptions based on compliance dates for Class II and III legacy freight train operations, certain other Class II and III freight railroad train operations, work train operations, helper service train operations, and lite locomotive train operations staffed with a one-person train crew.

(a) Application of this section.  A railroad is not required to comply with the requirements in this section for each one-person train crew operation subject to an exception covered by § 218.125 or § 218.127. The following train operations may be operated with a one-person train crew subject to the requirements in this subpart:

(1) Each Class II or III railroad's legacy one-person train crew freight operation that has been established for at least two years before June 10, 2024, may continue to operate with a one-person train crew, including continuing to transport hazardous materials of the types or quantities specified in § 218.123(c), if:

(i) No later than September 6, 2024, the railroad:

(A) Provides FRA with written notice, as specified by the requirements in paragraph (b) of this section; and

(B) Complies with the additional requirements in paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) of this section; and

(ii) No later than June 9, 2026, the railroad complies with the additional requirements in paragraph (c)(3) of this section.

(2) Each Class II or III freight railroad seeking to initiate a train operation staffed with a one-person train crew not transporting hazardous materials of the types or quantities specified in § 218.123(c) shall:

(i) Provide FRA with written notice, as specified by the requirements in paragraph (b) of this section before commencing the operation; and

(ii) Comply with the additional requirements in paragraph (c) of this section.

(3) Each railroad seeking to continue or initiate work train operations with a one-person train crew, including operations involving a work train traveling to or from a work site, shall:

(i) Limit this type of non-revenue service train that is used for the administration and upkeep service of the railroad so that it does not exceed 4,000 trailing tons;

(ii) No later than September 6, 2024, comply with the additional requirements in paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) of this section; and

(iii) No later than June 9, 2026, comply with the additional requirements in paragraph (c)(3) of this section.

(4) Each railroad seeking to continue or initiate helper service train operations with a one-person train crew, including operations involving a helper service train traveling to or from a work site, shall:

(i) No later than September 6, 2024, comply with the additional requirements in paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) of this section; and

(ii) No later than June 9, 2026, comply with the additional requirements in paragraph (c)(3) of this section.

(5) Each railroad seeking to continue or initiate a lite locomotive train operation staffed with a one-person train crew, excluding an MU locomotive operation, shall:

(i) No later than September 6, 2024, comply with the additional requirements in paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) of this section; and

(ii) No later than June 9, 2026, comply with the additional requirements in paragraph (c)(3) of this section.

(b) Written notice requirements.  The written notice shall be submitted by email to FRAOPCERTPROG@dot.gov and, at a minimum, include the following:

(1) The name, title, address, telephone number, and email address of the primary person(s) to be contacted regarding the written notice and the operation;

(2) The location of the operation, with as much specificity as can be provided, as to the characteristics of the geographic area through which the trains will operate (e.g., population density and proximity to environmentally sensitive areas), the terrain over which the trains will be operated, industries or communities served, and track segments, territories, divisions, or subdivisions operated over. For each legacy one-person train crew freight operation under paragraph (a)(1) of this section, the written notice must include business records or other written documents supporting that the legacy operation was established for at least two years before June 10, 2024. To establish a legacy one-person train crew freight operation, the railroad must provide evidence that the operation occurred at regular intervals under a set of defined procedures or conditions;

(3) The class(es) of track operated over, the method of operation, a list of the signal and train control systems, devices, and appliances installed and in operation, and a list of all active and passive highway-rail grade crossings, including crossing numbers;

(4) The locations of any track where the average grade of any segment of the track operated over is 1 percent or more over 3 continuous miles or 2 percent or more over 2 continuous miles;

(5) The maximum authorized speed of the operation;

(6) The approximate average number of miles and hours a one-person train crew will operate in a single tour of duty;

(7) The number and frequency of the trains involved, and the maximum number of cars and tonnage set for the operation, if any;

(8) Whether the one-person train crew operation is permitted to haul hazardous materials of any quantity and type, and the approximate percentage of carload traffic in the one-person train crew operation that is hazardous materials;

(9) Whether any limitations are placed on a person operating as a one-person train crew. Such limitations may include, but are not limited to, a maximum number of miles or hours during a single tour of duty, or limitations placed on a person in coordination with a fatigue mitigation plan;

(10) Information regarding other operations traveling on the same track as the one-person train operation or that travel on an adjacent track. Such information shall include, but is not limited to, the volume of traffic and the types of opposing moves (e.g., passenger trains or freight trains hauling hazardous materials);

(11) A detailed description of any technology that is used to perform tasks typically performed by a second crewmember, or that prevents or mitigates the consequences of accidents or incidents;

(12) A copy of any railroad rule or practice that applies to the one-person train crew operation, but does not apply to train crew operations with two or more crewmembers;

(13) For each railroad seeking to continue a legacy freight train operation staffed with a one-person train crew as permitted by paragraph (a)(1) of this section, five (5) years of accident and incident data, as required by part 225 of this chapter, for the operation identified or, for operations established less than five (5) years before June 10, 2024, accident and incident data for the operation from the date the operation was established; and

(14) Any other information describing protections provided in lieu of a second train crewmember, or relevant data or analysis, or both, that the railroad can provide about its one-person train crew operation and how that operation is as safe or safer than a two-person minimum train crew operation.

(c) Additional requirements.  Each railroad with an applicable one-person train crew operation shall:

(1) Adopt and comply with an operating rule that satisfies the requirements of this paragraph to ensure rail employees can take mitigation measures that provide a level of safety that is as safe or safer than a two-person train crew operation to address certain situations with the one-person train crew operation.

(i) At a minimum, the operating rule shall address the following types of situations:

(A) An accidental or non-accidental release of any hazardous material;

(B) An accident/incident regardless of whether it is required to be reported to FRA under part 225 of this chapter;

(C) A request from an emergency responder to unblock a highway-rail grade crossing in response to a potentially life-threatening situation;

(D) A train or on-track equipment derailment;

(E) A disabled train; and

(F) An illness, injury, or other incapacitation of the one-person train crewmember.

(ii) At a minimum, the operating rule shall:

(A) Describe the role and responsibilities of the one-person train crewmember and any other railroad employees, including supervisors, with responsibility to address a situation described in paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section; and

(B) Describe any logistics and the railroad's expected response time(s).

(2) Adopt and comply with an operating rule that satisfies the requirements of this paragraph to ensure radio or wireless communications with a one-person train crew is as safe or safer than a two-person train crew for train operations and crewmember safety. At a minimum, the operating rule shall require that:

(i) The one-person train crew have a working radio or working wireless communications on the controlling locomotive appropriate for railroad communications as defined in § 220.5 of this chapter, even if not otherwise required in § 220.9 of this chapter;

(ii) The train dispatcher or operator must confirm with a one-person train crewmember that the train is stopped before conveying a mandatory directive by radio transmission as required in § 220.61 of this chapter;

(iii) A one-person train crewmember must contact a railroad employee, typically a dispatcher, a supervisor or manager, or an intermittently assisting crewmember, whenever it can be anticipated that radio or wireless communication could be lost, e.g., before the train enters a tunnel, unless technology or a different protocol is established to monitor the train's real-time progress; and

(iv) Procedures that establish when search-and-rescue operations shall be initiated if all radio or wireless communication is lost with a one-person train crewmember.

(3) Adopt and comply with an operating rule that satisfies the requirements of this paragraph to ensure:

(i) A one-person train crew's controlling locomotive is equipped with a functioning alerter that is operating as intended as defined in § 229.5 of this chapter. For each railroad that limits the one-person train crew's operation to a maximum authorized speed of 25 miles per hour and is not required to have an alerter on the locomotive that is equipped per the requirements in § 229.140 of this chapter, any functioning alerter that is operating as intended will be acceptable if it has a manual reset and will result in a penalty brake application that brings the locomotive or train to a stop if not properly acknowledged; and

(ii) That a one-person train crewmember must test that alerter to confirm it is functioning before departure from each initial terminal, or prior to being coupled as the lead locomotive in a locomotive consist.

§ 218.131 Special approval petition requirements for train operations staffed with a one-person train crew.

(a) General.  With the exception of operations permitted under §§ 218.125 through 218.129, and as provided in paragraph (a)(2) of this section:

(1) No railroad may operate a train with a one-person train crew unless it receives special approval for the operation under this subpart.

(2) For a railroad that has established a one-person train crew operation before June 10, 2024, the railroad may continue the operation in accordance with this section pending FRA's decision on the railroad's special approval petition if:

(i) The railroad submits a written notice by email to FRAOPCERTPROG@dot.gov no later than June 24, 2024 that, at a minimum, provides a summary of the operation and the name, title, address, telephone number, and email address of the primary person(s) to be contacted regarding the written notice and the operation;

(ii) The railroad, in coordination with FRA, eliminates, mitigates, or otherwise addresses any safety hazards related to the one-person train crew operation FRA finds in reviewing the railroad's special approval petition; and

(iii) The railroad submits its special approval petition, as specified by the requirements in paragraph (b) of this section, no later than August 7, 2024.

(3) Each freight railroad seeking to either initiate or continue a train operation with a one-person train crew must receive FRA's special approval for the operation under this subpart and shall comply with the requirements in § 218.129(c).

(4) Each passenger railroad seeking to initiate a train operation with a one-person train crew must receive FRA's special approval for the operation under this subpart and have either:

(i) An approved passenger train emergency preparedness plan under part 239 of this chapter for the operation; or

(ii) An approved waiver from the passenger train emergency preparedness plan requirements as permitted under part 211 of this chapter. A passenger railroad may petition FRA for both a waiver under part 211 and special approval for a train operation staffed with a one-person train crew in the same filing.

(b) Petition for a train operation staffed with a one-person train crew.  Each petition for a train operation with a one-person train crew that is not permitted under §§ 218.125 through 218.129 must contain sufficient information for FRA to determine whether approving the operation described in the petition is as safe or safer than a two-person minimum train crew operation. At a minimum, a petition must include:

(1) The name, title, address, telephone number, and email address of the primary person to be contacted regarding review of the special approval petition;

(2) The location of the operation, with as much specificity as can be provided, as to the characteristics of the geographic area through which the trains will operate (e.g. population density and proximity to environmentally sensitive areas), the terrain over which the trains will be operated, industries or communities served, and track segments, territories, divisions, or subdivisions operated over;

(3) The class(es) of track to be operated over, the method of operation, a list of the signal and train control systems, devices, and appliances installed and in operation, and a list of all active and passive highway-rail grade crossings, including crossing numbers;

(4) The locations of any track where the average grade of any segment of the track operated over is 1 percent or more over 3 continuous miles or 2 percent or more over 2 continuous miles;

(5) The maximum authorized speed of the operation;

(6) The approximate average number of miles and hours a person is projected to operate as a train crewmember in a one-person train crew operation;

(7) The maximum number of cars and tonnage proposed for the operation, if any;

(8) Whether the railroad is seeking approval to transport hazardous materials of the types or quantities specified in § 218.123(c) or whether the railroad is seeking approval to transport other hazardous materials (as defined by § 171.8 of this title) of any quantity and type;

(9) Whether any limitations will be placed on a person operating as a one-person train crew. Such limitations may include, but are not limited to, a maximum number of miles or hours during a single tour of duty, or limitations placed on a person in coordination with a fatigue mitigation plan;

(10) Information regarding other operations that may travel on the same track as, or an adjacent track to, the train operation staffed with a one-person train crew. Such information shall include, but is not limited to, the volume of traffic and the types of opposing moves (e.g., passenger or freight trains hauling hazardous materials);

(11) A detailed description of any technology that will be used to perform or support tasks typically performed by a second crewmember, or that will prevent or significantly mitigate the consequences of accidents or incidents;

(12) A copy of any railroad rule or practice that will apply to the proposed train operation(s) with a one-person train crew, but does not apply to train crew operations with two or more crewmembers;

(13) A copy of a railroad operating rule that will apply to the proposed train operation(s) with a one-person train crew, and which complies with the requirements of § 218.129(c)(1), to ensure rail employees can take mitigation measures that provide a level of safety that is as safe or safer than a two-person train crew operation to address certain situations with the one-person train crew operation. A passenger train operation with an approved emergency preparedness plan under part 239 of this chapter satisfies the requirement in this paragraph (b)(13);

(14) Five (5) years of accident and incident data, as required by part 225 of this chapter, for the operation identified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, when operating with two or more crewmembers, or, for operations established less than five (5) years before June 10, 2024, accident and incident data for the operation from the date the operation was established;

(15) A risk assessment of the proposed operation that meets the requirements of § 218.133;

(16) Any other information describing protections provided in lieu of a second train crewmember, or other relevant data or analysis.

(c) Additional information.  FRA may request any additional information, beyond what is provided in the petition, that it deems necessary.

§ 218.133 Risk assessment content and procedures.

(a) General.  A risk assessment submitted under this subpart must meet the following requirements:

(1) Contain a list and descriptions of all functions, duties, and tasks associated with the proposed operation to be performed by the one-person train crewmember, other railroad employee(s), or equipment, including, at a minimum, any function performed:

(i) To prepare a train for operation (including, but not limited to, pre-departure inspections, obtaining track bulletins, orders, or manifests, managing the train consist, including train makeup, obtaining and ensuring the accuracy of the train consist, arming and testing the end-of-train device, and performing brake tests);

(ii) To operate a train (including, but not limited to, operating and controlling the train, interacting with non-crewmembers such as the dispatcher or roadway workers, and responding to emergencies or unexpected events); and

(iii) To ensure safety once a train has stopped moving (e.g., including, but not limited to, securing the train).

(2) Describe the allocation of all functions, duties, and tasks to the one-person train crewmember, other railroad employee(s), or equipment.

(3) Contain a risk-based hazard analysis for the proposed train operation's functions, duties, and tasks, that shall:

(i) Identify any new hazards, changes to existing hazards and/or changes to the risk of an existing hazard associated with the proposed train operation, as compared to a two-person minimum train crew operation, taking account of all aspects of the railroad's system, including, at a minimum, infrastructure, equipment, technology, work schedules, mode of operation, operating rules and practices, training and other areas impacting railroad safety;

(ii) Calculate and/or update each risk, quantitatively or qualitatively, or both, by assessing each new hazard, change to an existing hazard and/or change to the risk of a hazard, in terms of the severity and likelihood of a mishap;

(iii) Recalculate each risk mitigated in accordance with § 218.131(b)(15), quantitatively or qualitatively, or both, by assessing each new hazard, change to an existing hazard and/or change to the risk of a hazard and the level of mitigation (elimination or reduction), in terms of the severity and likelihood of a mishap; and

(iv) Provide a statement with supporting evidence that the one-person train crew operation with a fully implemented mitigation plan is as safe or safer than a two-person minimum train crew operation.

(4) Contain a mitigation plan that documents the design and implementation timeline of the sustained mitigation strategies to eliminate or reduce the overall risk to a level such that the one-person train crew operation is as safe or safer than a two-person minimum train crew operation, considering, at a minimum, the following:

(i) The design of the system, equipment, and components, including equipment reliability and the necessary functions to be performed, in both a normal operation and in a degraded or failed state; and

(ii) The human factors associated with the processes and tasks to be performed, including the required skills and capabilities, the operating environment, and existing or potential impairments.

(b) Alternative standard.  A railroad may petition the Associate Administrator for Safety for approval to use alternative methodologies or procedures, or both, other than those required by paragraph (a) of this section to assess the risk associated with an operation proposed under this section. If, after providing public notice of the request for approval and an opportunity for public comment on the request, the Associate Administrator for Safety finds that any such petition demonstrates that the alternative proposed methodology or procedures, or both, will provide an accurate assessment of the risk associated with the operation, the Associate Administrator for Safety may approve the use of the proposed alternative(s).

§ 218.135 Special approval procedure.

(a) Petition.  Each railroad submitting a petition under § 218.131 shall send the petition by email to FRAOPCERTPROG@dot.gov. FRA will make the petition publicly available at https://www.regulations.gov.

(b) Federal Register notice.  FRA will publish a notice in the Federal Register concerning each petition under § 218.131.

(c) Comment.  Not later than 60 days from the date of publication of the notice in the Federal Register under paragraph (b) of this section, any person may comment on the petition.

(1) Each comment shall provide all relevant information and data in support of the commenter's position.

(2) Each comment shall be submitted to FRA through https://www.regulations.gov to the docket identified in the Federal Register notice.

(d) Disposition of petitions. (1) If the Administrator finds it necessary or desirable, FRA will conduct a hearing on a petition in accordance with its rules of practice in part 211 of this chapter.

(2) A petition must not be implemented until approved. If FRA finds that the petition complies with the requirements of § 218.131 and that approving the petition is as safe or safer than a two-person minimum train crew operation, FRA will grant the petition, normally within 120 days of its receipt. If the petition is neither granted nor denied within 120 days, the petition remains pending for decision. FRA may attach special conditions to the approval of the petition. Following the approval of a petition, FRA may reopen consideration of the petition for cause stated.

(3) If FRA finds that a petition does not comply with the requirements of this subpart or that approving the petition would not be as safe or safer than a two-person minimum train crew operation, FRA will deny the petition, normally within 120 days of its receipt.

(4) When FRA decides a petition, reopens consideration of a petition, or closes a reopened petition, FRA will send written notice of the decision to the petitioner and publish that decision in the docket.

(e) Modifications. (1) A railroad that intends to materially modify an operation subject to an FRA approval under this section shall submit a description of how it intends to modify the operation, along with either a new or an updated risk assessment accounting for the identified proposed modifications. The new or updated risk assessment must meet the requirements of § 218.133 and be submitted by email to FRAOPCERTPROG@dot.gov at least 60 days before the date proposed to implement any such modification. For the purposes of this paragraph (e), a material modification is a change:

(i) To a railroad's operations, infrastructure, locomotive control technology, or risk mitigation technology, that may affect the safety of the operation;

(ii) That would affect the assumptions underlying the risk assessment on which an FRA approval under this section is based; or

(iii) That would affect the assumptions underlying the risk assessment's risk calculations or mitigations on which an FRA approval under this section is based.

(2) When FRA decides on a material modification to a petition, FRA will send written notice of the decision to the petitioner and publish that decision in the same docket created for the petition in paragraph (a) of this section. FRA may reopen consideration of a petition based on a material modification, deny the material modification, or grant the material modification with or without special conditions to the approval. A material modification must not be implemented until approved. If the material modification submission is neither granted nor denied within 60 days, the petition remains pending for decision.

§ 218.137 Annual railroad responsibilities after receipt of special approval.

(a) Each railroad that receives special approval to use an operation with a one-person train crew under this subpart shall prepare an annual report, which will be a formal review and analysis each calendar year, of the one-person train crew operation. The annual report, which will include a railroad's findings and conclusions from its review, shall be submitted no later than March 31 of the following year to FRAOPCERTPROG@dot.gov. The requirements in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section describe the components of a railroad's annual report.

(b) A railroad's annual report must include the safety data and information listed in paragraphs (b)(1) and (2) of this section for any one-person train crew operation that receives special approval under this subpart.

(1) The total number of:

(i) FRA-reportable accidents/incidents under part 225 of this chapter, including subtotals for accidents/incidents that occurred at a highway-rail grade crossing and those that did not occur at a highway-rail grade crossing, and subtotals by State and cause. If an accident/incident was FRA-reportable for more than one reason (e.g., the accident/incident occurred at a highway-rail grade crossing and resulted in rail equipment damages higher than the current reporting threshold), the accident/incident shall only be listed once in the total calculation;

(ii) FRA-reportable employee fatalities;

(iii) FRA-reportable employee injuries;

(iv) Trespasser fatalities at a highway-rail grade crossing;

(v) Trespasser injuries at a highway-rail grade crossing;

(vi) Passenger fatalities at a highway-rail grade crossing;

(vii) Passenger injuries at a highway-rail grade crossing;

(viii) Instances where a railroad employee did not comply with a railroad rule or practice applicable to the one-person train crew operation receiving special approval under this subpart but not applicable to train crew operations with two or more crewmembers that travel on the train;

(ix) Instances where a one-person train crewmember had a locomotive engineer or conductor certification revoked for violation of an operating rule or practice that occurred when the person was operating a one-person train crew operation receiving special approval under this subpart. In addition to the total number of these instances, the railroad must report the subtotals for each type of certification revoked;

(x) Accountable rail equipment accidents/incidents under part 225 of this chapter;

(xi) Instances when the railroad was required to comply with an operating rule to ensure rail employees can take mitigation measures that provide a level of safety that is as safe or safer than a two-person train crew operation to address certain situations with the one-person train crew operation under § 218.131(b)(13);

(xii) Instances when a dispatcher, operator, or other required employee unexpectedly lost communication with the one-person train crew operation receiving special approval under this subpart;

(xiii) Employee hours worked; and

(xiv) Train miles.

(2) For each instance counted in the totals reported in paragraphs (b)(1)(i) through (xii) of this section, a railroad's annual report must clearly identify each instance by date and location and provide a complete factual description of the event.

(c) The annual report must also include written confirmation that the risk assessment for operations receiving special approval under this subpart, including all calculations and assumptions, remains unchanged and that no technology changes have been implemented or new or additional hazards identified.

(1) If any risk assessment calculation or assumption changes for an operation receiving special approval under this subpart, a new or updated risk assessment meeting the requirements of § 218.133 must be prepared and submitted with the railroad's annual report. This annual reporting requirement does not negate the requirement to submit a new or updated risk assessment when making a material modification to an operation as required in § 218.135.

(2) Any new or updated risk assessment submitted in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section must include a written plan and schedule for implementing any mitigations required to address any newly identified hazards.

(d) FRA will review and respond to a railroad's annual report submission in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section by September 30 of the year it is submitted.

(1) FRA's response may include advice or recommendations; and

(2) For a one-person train crew operation receiving special approval under this subpart, FRA may reopen consideration of a petition under § 218.135 based on a finding that a railroad's annual report submission suggests that the petition does not comply with the requirements of this subpart or that the operation is no longer as safe or safer than a two-person train crew operation.


PART 242—QUALIFICATION AND CERTIFICATION OF CONDUCTORS

Authority:49 U.S.C. 20103, 20107, 20135, 20138, 20162, 20163, 21301, 21304, 21311; 28 U.S.C. 2461 note; and 49 CFR 1.89.

Source:76 FR 69841, Nov. 9, 2011, unless otherwise noted.

Subpart A—General

§ 242.1 Purpose and scope.

(a) The purpose of this part is to ensure that only those persons who meet minimum Federal safety standards serve as conductors, to reduce the rate and number of accidents and incidents and to improve railroad safety.

(b) This part prescribes minimum Federal safety standards for the eligibility, training, testing, certification and monitoring of all conductors to whom it applies. This part does not restrict a railroad from adopting and enforcing additional or more stringent requirements consistent with this part.

(c) The conductor certification requirements prescribed in this part apply to any person who meets the definition of conductor contained in § 242.7, regardless of the fact that the person may have a job classification title other than that of conductor.

§ 242.3 Application and responsibility for compliance.

(a) This part applies to all railroads, except:

(1) Railroads that operate only on track inside an installation that is not part of the general railroad system of transportation (i.e., plant railroads, as defined in § 242.7);

(2) Tourist, scenic, historic, or excursion operations that are not part of the general railroad system of transportation as defined in § 242.7; or

(3) Rapid transit operations in an urban area that are not connected to the general railroad system of transportation.

(b) Although the duties imposed by this part are generally stated in terms of the duty of a railroad, each person, including a contractor for a railroad, who performs any function covered by this part, must perform that function in accordance with this part.

§ 242.5 Effect and construction.

(a) FRA does not intend, by use of the term conductor in this part, to alter the terms, conditions, or interpretation of existing collective bargaining agreements that employ other job classification titles when identifying a person who is the crew member in charge of a movement that requires a locomotive engineer.

(b) FRA does not intend by issuance of these regulations to alter the authority of a railroad to initiate disciplinary sanctions against its employees, including managers and supervisors, in the normal and customary manner, including those contained in its collective bargaining agreements.

(c) Except as provided in § 242.213, nothing in this part shall be construed to create or prohibit an eligibility or entitlement to employment in other service for the railroad as a result of denial, suspension, or revocation of certification under this part.

(d) Nothing in this part shall be deemed to abridge any additional procedural rights or remedies not inconsistent with this part that are available to the employee under a collective bargaining agreement, the Railway Labor Act, or (with respect to employment at will) at common law with respect to removal from service or other adverse action taken as a consequence of this part.

§ 242.7 Definitions.

As used in this part—

Administrator   means the Administrator of the FRA or the Administrator's delegate.

Alcohol   means ethyl alcohol (ethanol) and includes use or possession of any beverage, mixture, or preparation containing ethyl alcohol.

Conductor   means the crewmember in charge of a “train or yard crew” as defined in part 218 of this chapter. See also the definition of “passenger conductor” in this section.

Controlled substance   has the meaning assigned by 21 U.S.C. 802 and includes all substances listed on Schedules I through V as they may be revised from time to time (21 CFR parts 1301-1316).

Drug   means any substance (other than alcohol) that has known mind or function-altering effects on a human subject, specifically including any psychoactive substance and including, but not limited to, controlled substances.

Drug and alcohol counselor (DAC)   means a person who meets the credentialing and qualification requirements of a “Substance Abuse Professional” (SAP), as provided in 49 CFR part 40.

Dual purpose vehicle   means a piece of on-track equipment that is capable of moving railroad rolling stock and may also function as roadway maintenance equipment.

File, filed   and filing mean submission of a document under this part on the date when the Docket Clerk receives it, or if sent by mail, the date mailing was completed.

FRA   means the Federal Railroad Administration.

FRA representative   means the FRA Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety/Chief Safety Officer and the Associate Administrator's delegate, including any safety inspector employed by the Federal Railroad Administration and any qualified state railroad safety inspector acting under part 212 of this chapter.

Ineligible or ineligibility   means that a person is legally disqualified from serving as a certified conductor. The term covers a number of circumstances in which a person may not serve as a certified conductor. Revocation of certification pursuant to § 242.407 and denial of certification pursuant to § 242.401 are two examples in which a person would be ineligible to serve as a conductor. A period of ineligibility may end when a condition or conditions are met. For example, when a person meets the conditions to serve as a conductor following an alcohol or drug violation pursuant to § 242.115.

Job aid   means information regarding other than main track physical characteristics that supplements the operating instructions of the territory over which the locomotive or train movement will occur. See definitions of “main track” and “physical characteristics” in this section. A job aid may consist of training on the territory pursuant to § 242.119, maps, charts or visual aids of the territory, or a person or persons to contact who are qualified on the territory and who can describe the physical characteristics of the territory. At a minimum, a job aid must cover characteristics of a territory including: permanent close clearances, location of permanent derails and switches, assigned radio frequencies in use and special instructions required for movement, if any, and railroad-identified unique operating conditions.

Joint operations   means rail operations conducted by more than one railroad on the same track regardless of whether such operations are the result of—

(1) Contractual arrangement between the railroads,

(2) Order of a governmental agency or a court of law, or

(3) Any other legally binding directive.

Knowingly   means having actual knowledge of the facts giving rise to the violation or that a reasonable person acting in the circumstances, exercising due care, would have had such knowledge.

Locomotive   means a piece of on-track equipment (other than specialized roadway maintenance equipment or a dual purpose vehicle operating in accordance with § 240.104(a)(2) of this chapter):

(1) With one or more propelling motors designed for moving other equipment;

(2) With one or more propelling motors designed to carry freight or passenger traffic or both; or

(3) Without propelling motors but with one or more control stands.

Locomotive engineer   means any person who moves a locomotive or group of locomotives regardless of whether they are coupled to other rolling equipment except:

(1) A person who moves a locomotive or group of locomotives within the confines of a locomotive repair or servicing area as provided for in §§ 218.5 and 218.29(a)(1) of this chapter; or

(2) A person who moves a locomotive or group of locomotives for distances of less than 100 feet and this incidental movement of a locomotive or locomotives is for inspection or maintenance purposes.

Locomotive engineer certificate   means a certificate issued pursuant to part 240 of this chapter.

Main track   means a track upon which the operation of trains is governed by one or more of the following methods of operation: Timetable; mandatory directive; signal indication; or any form of absolute or manual block system.

Medical examiner   means a person licensed as a doctor of medicine or doctor of osteopathy. A medical examiner can be a qualified full-time salaried employee of a railroad, a qualified practitioner who contracts with the railroad on a fee-for-service or other basis, or a qualified practitioner designated by the railroad to perform functions in connection with medical evaluations of employees. As used in this rule, the medical examiner owes a duty to make an honest and fully informed evaluation of the condition of an employee.

On-the-job training   means job training that occurs in the workplace, i.e., the employee learns the job while doing the job.

Passenger conductor   means a conductor who has also received emergency preparedness training under part 239 of this chapter. See also the definition of “conductor” in this section.

Person   means an entity of any type covered under 1 U.S.C. 1, including but not limited to the following: A railroad; a manager, supervisor, official, or other employee or agent of a railroad; any owner, manufacturer, lessor, or lessee of railroad equipment, track, or facilities; any independent contractor providing goods or services to a railroad; and any employee of such owner, manufacturer, lessor, lessee, or independent contractor.

Physical characteristics   means the actual track profile of and physical location for points within a specific yard or route that affect the movement of a locomotive or train. Physical characteristics includes both main track physical characteristics (see definition of “main track” in this section) and other than main track physical characteristics.

Plant railroad   means a plant or installation that owns or leases a locomotive, uses that locomotive to switch cars throughout the plant or installation, and is moving goods solely for use in the facility's own industrial processes. The plant or installation could include track immediately adjacent to the plant or installation if the plant railroad leases the track from the general system railroad and the lease provides for (and actual practice entails) the exclusive use of that trackage by the plant railroad and the general system railroad for purposes of moving only cars shipped to or from the plant. A plant or installation that operates a locomotive to switch or move cars for other entities, even if solely within the confines of the plant or installation, rather than for its own purposes or industrial processes, will not be considered a plant railroad because the performance of such activity makes the operation part of the general railroad system of transportation.

Qualified   means a person who has successfully completed all instruction, training and examination programs required by the employer, and the applicable parts of this chapter and that the person therefore may reasonably be expected to be proficient on all safety related tasks the person is assigned to perform.

Qualified instructor   means a person who has demonstrated, pursuant to the railroad's written program, an adequate knowledge of the subjects under instruction and, where applicable, has the necessary operating experience to effectively instruct in the field, and has the following qualifications:

(1) Is a certified conductor under this part; and

(2) Has been selected as such by a designated railroad officer, in concurrence with the designated employee representative, where present; or

(3) In absence of concurrence provided in paragraph (2) of this definition, has a minimum of 12 months service working as a train service employee.

If a railroad does not have designated employee representation, then a person employed by the railroad need not comply with paragraphs (2) or (3) of this definition to be a qualified instructor.

Railroad   means any form of nonhighway ground transportation that runs on rails or electromagnetic guideways and any entity providing such transportation, including:

(1) Commuter or other short-haul railroad passenger service in a metropolitan or suburban area and commuter railroad service that was operated by the Consolidated Rail Corporation on January 1, 1979; and

(2) High speed ground transportation systems that connect metropolitan areas, without regard to whether those systems use new technologies not associated with traditional railroads; but does not include rapid transit operations in an urban area that are not connected to the general railroad system of transportation.

Railroad officer   means any supervisory employee of a railroad.

Railroad rolling stock   is on-track equipment that is either a “railroad freight car” (as defined in § 215.5 of this chapter) or a “passenger car” (as defined in § 238.5 of this chapter).

Remote control operator   (RCO) means a certified locomotive engineer, as defined in § 240.7 of this chapter, certified by a railroad to operate remote control locomotives pursuant to § 240.107 of this chapter.

Roadway maintenance equipment   is on-track equipment powered by any means of energy other than hand power which is used in conjunction with maintenance, repair, construction or inspection of track, bridges, roadway, signal, communications, or electric traction systems.

Serve or service,   in the context of serving documents, has the meaning given in Rule 5 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure as amended. Similarly, the computation of time provisions in Rule 6 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure as amended are also applicable in this part. See also the definition of “filing” in this section.

Specialized roadway maintenance equipment   is roadway maintenance equipment that does not have the capability to move railroad rolling stock. Any alteration of such equipment that enables it to move railroad rolling stock will require that the equipment be treated as a dual purpose vehicle.

Substance abuse disorder   refers to a psychological or physical dependence on alcohol or a drug, or another identifiable and treatable mental or physical disorder involving the abuse of alcohol or drugs as a primary manifestation. A substance abuse disorder is “active” within the meaning of this part if the person is currently using alcohol or other drugs, except under medical supervision consistent with the restrictions described in § 219.103 of this chapter or has failed to complete primary treatment successfully or participate in aftercare successfully as directed by a DAC or SAP.

Substance Abuse Professional (SAP)   means a person who meets the qualifications of a substance abuse professional, as provided in part 40 of this title.

Territorial qualifications   means possessing the necessary knowledge concerning a railroad's operating rules and timetable special instructions including familiarity with applicable main track and other than main track physical characteristics of the territory over which the locomotive or train movement will occur.

Tourist, scenic, historic, or excursion operations that are not part of the general railroad system of transportation   means a tourist, scenic, historic, or excursion operation conducted only on track used exclusively for that purpose (i.e., there is no freight, intercity passenger, or commuter passenger railroad operation on the track).

[76 FR 69841, Nov. 9, 2011, as amended at 85 FR 81324, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 242.9 Waivers.

(a) A person subject to a requirement of this part may petition the Administrator for a waiver of compliance with such requirement. The filing of such a petition does not affect that person's responsibility for compliance with that requirement while the petition is being considered.

(b) Each petition for a waiver under this section must be filed in the manner and contain the information required by part 211 of this chapter.

(c) If the Administrator finds that a waiver of compliance is in the public interest and is consistent with railroad safety, the Administrator may grant the waiver subject to any conditions the Administrator deems necessary.

§ 242.11 Penalties and consequences for noncompliance.

(a) A person who violates any requirement of this part or causes the violation of any such requirement is subject to a civil penalty of at least $1,086 and not more than $35,516 per violation, except that: Penalties may be assessed against individuals only for willful violations, and, where a grossly negligent violation or a pattern of repeated violations has created an imminent hazard of death or injury to persons, or has caused death or injury, a penalty not to exceed $142,063 per violation may be assessed. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. See FRA's website at www.fra.dot.gov for a statement of agency civil penalty policy.

(b) A person who violates any requirement of this part or causes the violation of any such requirement may be subject to disqualification from all safety-sensitive service in accordance with part 209 of this chapter.

(c) A person who knowingly and willfully falsifies a record or report required by this part may be subject to criminal penalties under 49 U.S.C. 21311.

(d) In addition to the enforcement methods referred to in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section, FRA may also address violations of this part by use of the emergency order, compliance order, and/or injunctive provisions of the Federal rail safety laws.

[76 FR 69841, Nov. 9, 2011, as amended at 77 FR 24423, Apr. 24, 2012; 81 FR 43113, July 1, 2016; 82 FR 16135, Apr. 3, 2017; 83 FR 60750, Nov. 27, 2018; 84 FR 23737, May 23, 2019; 84 FR 37075, July 31, 2019; 86 FR 1760, Jan. 11, 2021; 86 FR 23256, May 3, 2021; 87 FR 15870, Mar. 21, 2022; 88 FR 1129, Jan. 6, 2023; 88 FR 89564, Dec. 28, 2023]

§ 242.13 Information collection requirements.

(a) The information collection requirements of this Part are being reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget pursuant to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.) and have not yet been assigned an OMB control number.

(b) The information collection requirements are found in the following sections: §§ 242.9, 242.101, 242.103, 242.105, 242.107, 242.109, 242.111, 242.113, 242.115, 242.117, 242.119, 242.121, 242.123, 242.125, 242.127, 242.203, 242.205, 242.209, 242.211, 242.213, 242.215, 242.301, 242.401, 242.403, 242.405, and 242.407.

Subpart B—Program and Eligibility Requirements

§ 242.101 Certification program required.

(a) After the pertinent date specified in § 242.105(d) or (e), each railroad shall have a certification program approved in accordance with § 242.103 that includes:

(1) A designation of the types of service that it determines will be used in compliance with the criteria established in § 242.107;

(2) A procedure for evaluating prior safety conduct that complies with the criteria established in § 242.109;

(3) A procedure for evaluating visual and hearing acuity that complies with the criteria established in § 242.117;

(4) A procedure for training that complies with the criteria established in § 242.119;

(5) A procedure for knowledge testing that complies with the criteria established in § 242.121; and

(6) A procedure for monitoring operational performance that complies with the criteria established in § 242.123.

(b) [Reserved]

§ 242.103 Approval of design of individual railroad programs by FRA.

(a) Each railroad shall submit its written certification program and request for approval in accordance with the procedures contained in appendix B of this part according to the following schedule:

(1) A Class I railroad (including the National Railroad Passenger Corporation), Class II railroad, or railroad providing commuter service shall submit a program no later than September 30, 2012; and

(2) A Class III railroad (including a switching and terminal or other railroad not otherwise classified) shall submit a program no later than January 31, 2013.

(b) A railroad commencing operations after the pertinent date specified in paragraph (a) of this section shall submit its written certification program and request for approval in accordance with the procedures contained in appendix B to this part at least 60 days prior to commencing operations. The primary method for a railroad's submission is by email to FRAOPCERTPROG@dot.gov. For those railroads that are unable to send the program by email, the program may be sent to the Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety/Chief Safety Officer, Federal Railroad Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE, Washington, DC 20590.

(c) Each railroad shall:

(1) Simultaneous with its filing with FRA, provide a copy of the submission filed pursuant to paragraph (a) or (b) of this section, a resubmission filed pursuant to paragraph (h) of this section, or a material modification filed pursuant to paragraph (i) of this section to the president of each labor organization that represents the railroad's employees subject to this part; and

(2) Include in its submission filed pursuant to paragraph (a) or (b) of this section, a resubmission filed pursuant to paragraph (h) of this section, or a material modification filed pursuant to paragraph (i) of this section a statement affirming that the railroad has provided a copy to the president of each labor organization that represents the railroad's employees subject to this part, together with a list of the names and addresses of persons provided a copy.

(d) Not later than 45 days from the date of filing a submission pursuant to paragraph (a) or (b) of this section, a resubmission pursuant to paragraph (h) of this section, or a material modification pursuant to paragraph (i) of this section, any designated representative of railroad employees subject to this part may comment on the submission, resubmission, or material modification:

(1) Each comment shall set forth specifically the basis upon which it is made, and contain a concise statement of the interest of the commenter in the proceeding;

(2) Each comment shall be submitted by email to FRAOPCERTPROG@dot.gov or by mail to the Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety/Chief Safety Officer, FRA, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE, Washington, DC 20590; and

(3) The commenter shall affirm that a copy of the comment was provided to the railroad.

(e) The submission required by paragraph (a) or (b) of this section shall state the railroad's election either:

(1) To accept responsibility for the training of conductors and thereby obtain authority for that railroad to initially certify a person as a conductor in an appropriate type of service; or

(2) To recertify only conductors previously certified by other railroads.

(f) A railroad that elects to accept responsibility for the training of conductors shall state in its submission whether it will conduct the training program or employ a training program conducted by some other entity on its behalf but adopted and ratified by that railroad.

(g) A railroad's program is considered approved and may be implemented 30 days after the required filing date (or the actual filing date) unless the Administrator notifies the railroad in writing that the program does not conform to the criteria set forth in this part.

(1) If the Administrator determines that the program does not conform, the Administrator will inform the railroad of the specific deficiencies.

(2) If the Administrator informs the railroad of deficiencies more than 30 days after the initial filing date, the original program may remain in effect until 30 days after approval of the revised program is received so long as the railroad has complied with the requirements of paragraph (h) of this section.

(h) A railroad shall resubmit its program within 30 days after the date of such notice of deficiencies. A failure to resubmit the program with the necessary revisions will be considered a failure to implement a program under this part.

(1) The Administrator will inform the railroad in writing whether its revised program conforms to this part.

(2) If the program does not conform, the railroad shall resubmit its program.

(i) A railroad that intends to materially modify its program after receiving initial FRA approval shall submit a description of how it intends to modify the program in conformity with the specific requirements of this part at least 60 days prior to implementing such a change.

(1) A modification is material if it would affect the program's conformance with this part.

(2) The modification submission shall contain a description that conforms to the pertinent portion of the procedures contained in appendix B of this part.

(3) The modification submission will be handled in accordance with the procedures of paragraphs (g) and (h) of this section as though it were a new program.

[76 FR 69841, Nov. 9, 2011, as amended at 77 FR 6491, Feb. 8, 2012; 85 FR 81324, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 242.105 Schedule for implementation.

(a) By September 1, 2012, each railroad shall:

(1) In writing, designate as certified conductors all persons authorized by the railroad to perform the duties of a conductor as of January 1, 2012; and

(2) Issue a certificate that complies with § 242.207 to each person that it designates.

(b) After September 1, 2012, each railroad shall:

(1) In writing, designate as a certified conductor any person who has been authorized by the railroad to perform the duties of a conductor between January 1, 2012 and the pertinent date in paragraph (d) or (e) of this section; and

(2) Issue a certificate that complies with § 242.207 to each person that it designates.

(c) No railroad shall permit or require a person, designated as a certified conductor under the provisions of paragraph (a) or (b) of this section, to perform service as a certified conductor for more than a 36-month period beginning on the pertinent date for compliance with the mandatory procedures for testing and evaluation set forth in the applicable provisions of paragraph (d) or (e) of this section unless that person has been certified in accordance with procedures that comply with subpart B of this part.

(1) Except as provided in paragraph (c)(3) of this section, a person who has been designated as a certified conductor under the provisions of paragraph (a) or (b) of this section and who is eligible to receive a retirement pension in accordance with the terms of an applicable agreement or in accordance with the terms of the Railroad Retirement Act (45 U.S.C. 231) within 36 months from the pertinent date for compliance with the mandatory procedures for testing and evaluation set forth in the applicable provisions of paragraph (d) or (e) of this section, may request, in writing, that a railroad not recertify that person, pursuant to subpart B of this part, until 36 months from the pertinent date for compliance with the mandatory procedures for testing and evaluation set forth in the applicable provisions of paragraph (d) or (e) of this section.

(2) Upon receipt of a written request pursuant to paragraph (c)(1) of this section, a railroad may wait to recertify the person making the request until the end of the 36-month period described in paragraph (c) of this section. If a railroad grants any request, it must grant the request of all eligible persons to every extent possible.

(3) A person who is subject to recertification under part 240 of this chapter may not make a request pursuant to paragraph (c)(1) of this section.

(d) After December 1, 2012, no Class I railroad (including the National Railroad Passenger Corporation), Class II railroad, or railroad providing commuter service shall initially certify or recertify a person as a conductor unless that person has been tested and evaluated in accordance with procedures that comply with subpart B of this part and issued a certificate that complies with § 242.207.

(e) After April 1, 2013, no Class III railroad (including a switching and terminal or other railroad not otherwise classified) shall initially certify or recertify a person as a conductor unless that person has been tested and evaluated in accordance with procedures that comply with subpart B of this part and issued a certificate that complies with § 242.207.

(f) After the applicable dates specified in paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section, no person shall serve as a conductor in any type of service and no railroad shall require or permit any person to serve as a conductor in any type of service unless that person has been tested and evaluated in accordance with procedures that comply with subpart B of this part and issued a certificate that complies with § 242.207.

[76 FR 69841, Nov. 9, 2011, as amended at 77 FR 6491, Feb. 8, 2012]

§ 242.107 Types of service.

(a) Each railroad's program shall state which of the two types of service (conductor and passenger conductor), provided for in paragraph (b) of this section, that it will cover.

(b) A railroad may issue certificates for either of the following types of service:

(1) Conductor; and

(2) Passenger conductor.

(c) A railroad shall not reclassify the certification of any type of certified conductor to a different type of conductor certification during the period in which the certification is otherwise valid except when a conductor completes the emergency training identified in part 239 of this chapter and is certified as a passenger conductor.

(d) Each railroad is authorized to impose additional conditions or operational restrictions on the service a conductor may perform beyond those identified in this section provided those conditions or restrictions are not inconsistent with this part.

§ 242.109 Determinations required for certification and recertification.

(a) After the pertinent date specified in § 242.105(d) or (e), each railroad, prior to initially certifying or recertifying any person as a conductor, shall, in accordance with its FRA-approved program, determine in writing that:

(1) The individual meets the eligibility requirements of §§ 242.111, 242.113, 242.115, and 242.403; and

(2) The individual meets the vision and hearing acuity standards of § 242.117 (“Vision and hearing acuity”);

(3) The individual has the necessary knowledge, as demonstrated by successfully completing a test that meets the requirements of § 242.121 (“Knowledge testing”); and

(4) Where a person has not previously been certified, that the person has completed a training program that meets the requirements of § 242.119 (“Training”).

(b) When evaluating a person's prior safety conduct, a railroad shall not consider information concerning prior conduct that:

(1) Occurred prior to the effective date of this rule; or

(2) Occurred at a time other than that specifically provided for in §§ 242.111, 242.115 or 242.403.

(c) In order to make the determination required under paragraph (a) of this section, a railroad shall have on file documents pertinent to those determinations.

(d) A railroad's program shall provide a candidate for certification or recertification a reasonable opportunity to review and comment in writing on any record which contains information concerning the person's prior safety conduct, including information pertinent to determinations required under § 242.115, if the railroad believes the record contains information that could be sufficient to render the person ineligible for certification under this subpart.

(e) The opportunity for comment shall be afforded to the person prior to the railroad's rendering its eligibility decision based on that information. Any responsive comment furnished shall be retained by the railroad in accordance with § 242.203.

(f) The program shall include a method for a person to advise the railroad that he or she has never been a railroad employee or obtained a license to drive a motor vehicle. Nothing in this section shall be construed as imposing a duty or requirement that a person have prior railroad employment experience or obtain a motor vehicle driver's license in order to become a certified conductor.

(g) Nothing in this section, § 242.111 or § 242.113 shall be construed to prevent persons subject to this part from entering into an agreement that results in a railroad's obtaining the information needed for compliance with this subpart in a different manner than that prescribed in § 242.111 or § 242.113.

§ 242.111 Prior safety conduct as motor vehicle operator.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with a program meeting the requirements of this section. When any person (including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee) violates any requirement of a program which complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) Except as provided in paragraphs (c), (d), (e), and (f) of this section, after the pertinent date specified in § 242.105(d) or (e), each railroad, prior to initially certifying or recertifying any person as a conductor for any type of service, shall determine that the person meets the eligibility requirements of this section involving prior conduct as a motor vehicle operator.

(c) A railroad shall initially certify a person as a conductor for 60 days if the person:

(1) Requested the information required by paragraph (h) of this section at least 60 days prior to the date of the decision to certify that person; and

(2) Otherwise meets the eligibility requirements provided in § 242.109.

(d) A railroad shall recertify a person as a conductor for 60 days from the expiration date of that person's certification if the person:

(1) Requested the information required by paragraph (h) of this section at least 60 days prior to the date of the decision to recertify that person; and

(2) Otherwise meets the eligibility requirements provided in § 242.109.

(e) Except as provided in paragraph (f) of this section, if a railroad who certified or recertified a person pursuant to paragraph (c) or (d) of this section does not obtain and evaluate the information required pursuant to paragraph (h) of this section within 60 days of the pertinent dates identified in paragraph (c) or (d) of this section, that person will be ineligible to perform as a conductor until the information can be evaluated.

(f) If a person requests the information required pursuant to paragraph (h) of this section but is unable to obtain it, that person or the railroad certifying or recertifying that person may petition for a waiver of the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section in accordance with the provisions of part 211 of this chapter. A railroad shall certify or recertify a person during the pendency of the waiver request if the person otherwise meets the eligibility requirements provided in § 242.109.

(g) Individual's duty.  Except for persons designated as conductors under § 242.105(a) or (b) or for persons covered by § 242.109(f), each person seeking certification or recertification under this part shall, within 366 days preceding the date of the railroad's decision on certification or recertification:

(1) Take the actions required by paragraphs (h) through (j) of this section to make information concerning his or her driving record available to the railroad that is considering such certification or recertification; and

(2) Take any additional actions, including providing any necessary consent required by State, Federal, or foreign law to make information concerning his or her driving record available to that railroad.

(h) Each person seeking certification or recertification under this part shall request, in writing, that the chief of each driver licensing agency identified in paragraph (i) of this section provide a copy of that agency's available information concerning his or her driving record to the railroad that is considering such certification or recertification.

(i) Each person shall request the information required under paragraph (h) of this section from:

(1) The chief of the driver licensing agency of any jurisdiction, including a state or foreign country, which last issued that person a driver's license; and

(2) The chief of the driver licensing agency of any other jurisdiction, including states or foreign countries, that issued or reissued the person a driver's license within the preceding five years.

(j) If advised by the railroad that a driver licensing agency has informed the railroad that additional information concerning that person's driving history may exist in the files of a state agency or foreign country not previously contacted in accordance with this section, such person shall:

(1) Request in writing that the chief of the driver licensing agency which compiled the information provide a copy of the available information to the prospective certifying railroad; and

(2) Take any additional action required by State, Federal, or foreign law to obtain that additional information.

(k) Any person who has never obtained a motor vehicle driving license is not required to comply with the provisions of paragraph (h) of this section but shall notify the railroad of that fact in accordance with procedures of the railroad that comply with § 242.109(f).

(l) Each certified conductor or person seeking initial certification shall report motor vehicle incidents described in paragraphs (n)(1) and (2) of this section to the employing railroad within 48 hours of being convicted for, or completed state action to cancel, revoke, suspend, or deny a motor vehicle drivers license for, such violations. For purposes of this paragraph and paragraph (n) of this section, “state action” means action of the jurisdiction that has issued the motor vehicle driver's license, including a foreign country. For the purposes of conductor certification, no railroad shall require reporting earlier than 48 hours after the conviction, or completed state action to cancel, revoke, or deny a motor vehicle drivers license.

(m) Evaluation of record.  When evaluating a person's motor vehicle driving record, a railroad shall not consider information concerning motor vehicle driving incidents that occurred:

(1) Prior to the effective date of this rule;

(2) More than 36 months before the month in which the railroad is making its certification decision; or

(3) At a time other than that specifically provided for in §§ 242.111, 242.115, or 242.403.

(n) A railroad shall only consider information concerning the following types of motor vehicle incidents:

(1) A conviction for, or completed state action to cancel, revoke, suspend, or deny a motor vehicle drivers license for, operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of or impaired by alcohol or a controlled substance; or

(2) A conviction for, or completed state action to cancel, revoke, suspend, or deny a motor vehicle driver's license for, refusal to undergo such testing as is required by State or foreign law when a law enforcement official seeks to determine whether a person is operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance.

(o) If such an incident is identified:

(1) The railroad shall provide the data to the railroad's DAC, together with any information concerning the person's railroad service record, and shall refer the person for evaluation to determine if the person has an active substance abuse disorder;

(2) The person shall cooperate in the evaluation and shall provide any requested records of prior counseling or treatment for review exclusively by the DAC in the context of such evaluation; and

(3) If the person is evaluated as not currently affected by an active substance abuse disorder, the subject data shall not be considered further with respect to certification. However, the railroad shall, on recommendation of the DAC, condition certification upon participation in any needed aftercare and/or follow-up testing for alcohol or drugs deemed necessary by the DAC consistent with the technical standards specified in § 242.115(f)(3).

(4) If the person is evaluated as currently affected by an active substance abuse disorder, the provisions of § 242.115(d) will apply.

(5) If the person fails to comply with the requirements of paragraph (o)(2) of this section, the person shall be ineligible to perform as a conductor until such time as the person complies with the requirements.

§ 242.113 Prior safety conduct as an employee of a different railroad.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with a program which complies with the requirements of this section. When any person including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee violates any requirement of a program which complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) After the pertinent date specified in § 242.105(d) or (e), each railroad, prior to initially certifying or recertifying any person as a conductor for any type of service, shall determine that the person meets the eligibility requirements of this section.

(c) Except for persons designated as conductors under § 242.105(a) or (b) or for persons covered by § 242.109(f), each person seeking certification or recertification under this part shall, within 366 days preceding the date of the railroad's decision on certification or recertification:

(1) Request, in writing, that the chief operating officer or other appropriate person of the former employing railroad provide a copy of that railroad's available information concerning his or her service record pertaining to compliance or non-compliance with §§ 242.111, 242.115, and 242.403 to the railroad that is considering such certification or recertification; and

(2) Take any additional actions, including providing any necessary consent required by State or Federal law to make information concerning his or her service record available to that railroad.

§ 242.115 Substance abuse disorders and alcohol drug rules compliance.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with a program which complies with the requirements of this section. When any person, including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee, violates any requirement of a program which complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) After the pertinent date specified in § 242.105(d) or (e), each railroad, prior to initially certifying or recertifying any person as a conductor for any type of service, shall determine that the person meets the eligibility requirements of this section.

(c) In order to make the determination required under paragraph (d) of this section, a railroad shall have on file documents pertinent to that determination, including a written document from its DAC which states his or her professional opinion that the person has been evaluated as not currently affected by a substance abuse disorder or that the person has been evaluated as affected by an active substance abuse disorder.

(d) Fitness requirement. (1) A person who has an active substance abuse disorder shall be denied certification or recertification as a conductor.

(2) Except as provided in paragraph (g) of this section, a certified conductor who is determined to have an active substance abuse disorder shall be ineligible to hold certification. Consistent with other provisions of this part, certification may be reinstated as provided in paragraph (f) of this section.

(3) In the case of a current employee of the railroad evaluated as having an active substance abuse disorder (including a person identified under the procedures of § 242.111), the employee may, if otherwise eligible, voluntarily self-refer for substance abuse counseling or treatment under the policy required by § 219.403 of this chapter; and the railroad shall then treat the substance abuse evaluation as confidential except with respect to ineligibility for certification.

(e) Prior alcohol/drug conduct; Federal rule compliance. (1) In determining whether a person may be or remain certified as a conductor, a railroad shall consider conduct described in paragraph (e)(2) of this section that occurred within a period of 60 consecutive months prior to the review. A review of certification shall be initiated promptly upon the occurrence and documentation of any incident of conduct described in this paragraph.

(2) A railroad shall consider any violation of § 219.101 or § 219.102 of this chapter and any refusal to provide a breath or body fluid sample for testing under the requirements of part 219 of this chapter when instructed to do so by a railroad representative.

(3) A period of ineligibility described in this section shall begin:

(i) For a person not currently certified, on the date of the railroad's written determination that the most recent incident has occurred; or

(ii) For a person currently certified, on the date of the railroad's notification to the person that recertification has been denied or certification has been revoked; and

(4) The period of ineligibility described in this section shall be determined in accordance with the following standards:

(i) In the case of a single violation of § 219.102 of this chapter, the person shall be ineligible to hold a certificate during evaluation and any required primary treatment as described in paragraph (f) of this section. In the case of two violations of § 219.102 of this chapter, the person shall be ineligible to hold a certificate for a period of two years. In the case of more than two such violations, the person shall be ineligible to hold a certificate for a period of five years.

(ii) In the case of one violation of § 219.102 of this chapter and one violation of § 219.101 of this chapter, the person shall be ineligible to hold a certificate for a period of three years.

(iii) In the case of one violation of § 219.101 of this chapter, the person shall be ineligible to hold a certificate for a period of 9 months (unless identification of the violation was through a qualifying “co-worker report” as described in § 219.405 of this chapter and the conductor waives investigation, in which case the certificate shall be deemed suspended during evaluation and any required primary treatment as described in paragraph (f)). In the case of two or more violations of § 219.101 of this chapter, the person shall be ineligible to hold a certificate for a period of five years.

(iv) A refusal to provide a breath or body fluid sample for testing under the requirements of part 219 of this chapter when instructed to do so by a railroad representative shall be treated, for purposes of ineligibility under this paragraph, in the same manner as a violation of:

(A) Section 219.102 of this chapter, in the case of a refusal to provide a body fluid specimen for testing; or

(B) Section 219.101 of this chapter, in the case of a refusal to provide a breath sample for alcohol testing or a blood specimen for mandatory post-accident toxicological testing.

(f) Future eligibility to hold certificate following alcohol/drug violation.  The following requirements apply to a person who has been denied certification or who has had certification suspended or revoked as a result of conduct described in paragraph (e) of this section:

(1) The person shall not be eligible for grant or reinstatement of the certificate unless and until the person has:

(i) Been evaluated by a SAP to determine if the person currently has an active substance abuse disorder;

(ii) Successfully completed any program of counseling or treatment determined to be necessary by the SAP prior to return to service; and

(iii) In accordance with the testing procedures of subpart H of part 219 of this chapter, has had an alcohol test with an alcohol concentration of less than .02 and presented a body fluid sample that tested negative for controlled substances assayed.

(2) A conductor placed in service or returned to service under the above-stated conditions shall continue in any program of counseling or treatment deemed necessary by the SAP and shall be subject to a reasonable program of follow-up alcohol and drug testing without prior notice for a period of not more than 60 months following return to service. Follow-up tests shall include not fewer than 6 alcohol tests and 6 drug tests during the first 12 months following return to service.

(3) Return-to-service and follow-up alcohol and drug tests shall be performed consistent with the requirements of subpart H of part 219 of this chapter.

(4) This paragraph does not create an entitlement to utilize the services of a railroad SAP, to be afforded leave from employment for counseling or treatment, or to employment as a conductor. Nor does it restrict any discretion available to the railroad to take disciplinary action based on conduct described herein.

(g) Confidentiality protected.  Nothing in this part shall affect the responsibility of the railroad under § 219.403 of this chapter (“Voluntary referral policy”) to treat voluntary referrals for substance abuse counseling and treatment as confidential; and the certification status of a conductor who is successfully assisted under the procedures of that section shall not be adversely affected. However, the railroad shall include in its voluntary referral policy required to be issued pursuant to § 219.403 of this chapter a provision that, at least with respect to a certified conductor or a candidate for certification, the policy of confidentiality is waived (to the extent that the railroad shall receive from the SAP or DAC official notice of the substance abuse disorder and shall suspend or revoke the certification, as appropriate) if the person at any time refuses to cooperate in a recommended course of counseling or treatment.

[76 FR 69841, Nov. 9, 2011, as amended at 88 FR 27652, May 2, 2023]

§ 242.117 Vision and hearing acuity.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with a program which complies with the requirements of this section. When any person including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee violates any requirement of a program which complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) After the pertinent date specified in § 242.105(d) or (e), each railroad, prior to initially certifying or recertifying any person as a conductor for any class of service, shall determine that the person meets the standards for visual acuity and hearing acuity prescribed in this section.

(c) In order to make the determination required under paragraph (b) of this section, a railroad shall have on file either:

(1) A medical examiner's certificate that the individual has been medically examined and meets these acuity standards; or

(2) A written document from its medical examiner documenting his or her professional opinion that the person does not meet one or both acuity standards and stating the basis for his or her determination that:

(i) The person can nevertheless be certified under certain conditions; or

(ii) The person's acuity is such that the person cannot safely perform as a conductor even with conditions attached.

(d) Any examination required for compliance with this section shall be performed by or under the supervision of a medical examiner or a licensed physician's assistant such that:

(1) A licensed optometrist or a technician responsible to that person may perform the portion of the examination that pertains to visual acuity; and

(2) A licensed or certified audiologist or a technician responsible to that person may perform the portion of the examination that pertains to hearing acuity.

(e) If the examination required under this section discloses that the person needs corrective lenses or a hearing aid, or both, either to meet the threshold acuity levels established in this section or to meet a lower threshold determined by the railroad's medical examiner to be sufficient to perform as a conductor, that fact shall be noted on the certificate issued in accordance with the provisions of this part.

(f) Any person with such a certificate notation shall use the relevant corrective device(s) while performing as a conductor unless the railroad's medical examiner subsequently determines in writing that the person can safely perform without using the device.

(g) In order to be currently certified as a conductor, except as permitted by paragraph (j) of this section, a person's vision and hearing shall meet or exceed the standards prescribed in this section and appendix D to this part. It is recommended that each test conducted pursuant to this section should be performed according to any directions supplied by the manufacturer of such test and any American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards that are applicable.

(h) Except as provided in paragraph (j) of this section, each person shall have visual acuity that meets or exceeds the following thresholds:

(1) For distant viewing, either:

(i) Distant visual acuity of at least 20/40 (Snellen) in each eye without corrective lenses; or

(ii) Distant visual acuity separately corrected to at least 20/40 (Snellen) with corrective lenses and distant binocular acuity of at least 20/40 (Snellen) in both eyes with or without corrective lenses;

(2) A field of vision of at least 70 degrees in the horizontal meridian in each eye; and

(3) The ability to recognize and distinguish between the colors of railroad signals as demonstrated by successfully completing one of the tests in appendix D to this part.

(i) Except as provided in paragraph (j) of this section, each person shall have a hearing test or audiogram that shows the person's hearing acuity meets or exceeds the following thresholds: The person does not have an average hearing loss in the better ear greater than 40 decibels with or without use of a hearing aid, at 500 Hz, 1,000 Hz, and 2,000 Hz. The hearing test or audiogram shall meet the requirements of one of the following:

(1) As required in 29 CFR 1910.95(h) (Occupational Safety and Health Administration);

(2) As required in § 227.111 of this chapter; or

(3) Conducted using an audiometer that meets the specifications of and is maintained and used in accordance with a formal industry standard, such as ANSI S3.6, “Specifications for Audiometers.”

(j) A person not meeting the thresholds in paragraphs (h) and (i) of this section shall, upon request, be subject to further medical evaluation by a railroad's medical examiner to determine that person's ability to safely perform as a conductor. In accordance with the guidance prescribed in Appendix D to this part, a person is entitled to one retest without making any showing and to another retest if the person provides evidence substantiating that circumstances have changed since the last test to the extent that the person could now safely perform as a conductor. The railroad shall provide its medical examiner with a copy of this part, including all appendices. If, after consultation with a railroad officer, the medical examiner concludes that, despite not meeting the threshold(s) in paragraphs (h) and (i) of this section, the person has the ability to safely perform as a conductor, the person may be certified as a conductor and such certification conditioned on any special restrictions the medical examiner determines in writing to be necessary.

(k) As a condition of maintaining certification, each certified conductor shall notify his or her employing railroad's medical department or, if no such department exists, an appropriate railroad official if the person's best correctable vision or hearing has deteriorated to the extent that the person no longer meets one or more of the prescribed vision or hearing standards or requirements of this section. This notification is required prior to any subsequent performance as a conductor.

[76 FR 69841, Nov. 9, 2011, as amended at 85 FR 81324, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 242.119 Training.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with a program that meets the requirements of this section. When any person including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee violates any requirement of a program which complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) After the pertinent date specified in § 242.105(d) or (e), each railroad, prior to the initial issuance of a certificate to any person as a conductor, shall determine that the person has, in accordance with the requirements of this section, the knowledge to safely perform as a conductor in each type of service that the person will be permitted to perform.

(c) In making this determination, a railroad shall have written documentation showing that:

(1) The person completed a training program that complies with paragraph (d) of this section;

(2) The person demonstrated his or her knowledge by achieving a passing grade under the testing and evaluation procedures of that training program; and

(3) The person demonstrated that he or she is qualified on the physical characteristics of the railroad, or its pertinent segments, over which that person will perform service.

(d) A railroad that elects to train a previously untrained person to be a conductor shall develop an initial training program which, at a minimum, includes the following:

(1) Determine how training must be structured, developed, and delivered, including an appropriate combination of classroom, simulator, computer-based, correspondence, on-the-job training, or other formal training. The curriculum shall be designed to impart knowledge of, and ability to comply with applicable Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders, as well as any relevant railroad rules and procedures promulgated to implement those applicable Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders. This training shall document a person's knowledge of, and ability to comply with, Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders, as well as railroad rules and procedures.

(2) The on-the-job portion of the training program shall consist of the following three key components:

(i) A brief statement describing the tasks and related steps the employee learning the job shall be able to perform;

(ii) A statement of the conditions (e.g., prerequisites, tools, equipment, documentation, briefings, demonstrations, and practice) necessary for learning transfer; and

(iii) A statement of the standards by which proficiency is measured through a combination of task/step accuracy, completeness, and repetition.

(3) Prior to beginning the initial safety-related tasks associated with on-the-job exercises, employers shall make any relevant information or materials, such as operating rules, safety rules, or other rules available to employees involved for referencing.

(4) The tasks and related steps associated with on-the-job exercises for a particular type of conductor service (e.g., passenger conductor) shall be maintained together in one manual, checklist, or similar document. This reference shall be made available to all employees involved in those on-the-job exercises.

(5) When new safety-related railroad laws, regulations, orders, technologies, procedures, or equipment are introduced into the workplace, the railroad must review its training program and modify its training plan accordingly.

(e) Prior to a previously untrained person being certified as a conductor, a railroad shall require the person to:

(1) Successfully complete the formal initial training program developed pursuant to paragraph (d) of this section and any associated examinations covering the skills and knowledge the person will need to possess in order to perform the tasks necessary to be a conductor; and

(2) Demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the railroad with input from a qualified instructor, on-the-job proficiency by successfully completing the tasks necessary to be a conductor. However, a person may perform such tasks under the direct onsite supervision of a person, who has the necessary operating experience, as part of the on-the-job training process prior to completing such training and passing the field evaluation; and

(3) Demonstrate knowledge of the physical characteristics of any assigned territory by successfully completing a test created by a person qualified on the physical characteristics of the territory.

(f) If a railroad uses a written test for purposes of paragraph (e)(3) of this section, the railroad must provide the person(s) being tested with an opportunity to consult with a supervisory employee, who possesses territorial qualifications for the territory, to explain a question.

(g) A person may acquire familiarity with the physical characteristics of a territory through the following methods:

(1) The methods used by a railroad for familiarizing its conductors with new territory while starting up a new railroad;

(2) The methods used by a railroad for starting operations over newly acquired rail lines; or

(3) The methods used by a railroad for reopening of a long unused route.

(h) The methods listed in paragraph (g) of this section shall be described in the railroad's conductor qualification program required under this part and submitted according to the procedures described in Appendix B to this part.

(i) If ownership of a railroad is being transferred from one company to another, the conductor(s) of the acquiring company may receive familiarization training from the selling company prior to the acquiring railroad commencing operation.

(j) A railroad shall designate in its program required by this section the time period in which a conductor must be absent from a territory or yard, before requalification on physical characteristics is required.

(k) A railroad's program shall include the procedures used to qualify or requalify a person on the physical characteristics.

(l) A railroad shall provide for the continuing education of certified conductors to ensure that each conductor maintains the necessary knowledge concerning railroad safety and operating rules and compliance with all applicable Federal regulations, including, but not limited to, hazardous materials, passenger train emergency preparedness, brake system safety standards, pre-departure inspection procedures, and passenger equipment safety standards, and physical characteristics of a territory.

§ 242.121 Knowledge testing.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with a program that meets the requirements of this section. When any person including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee violates any requirement of a program which complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) After the pertinent date specified in § 242.105(d) or (e), each railroad, prior to initially certifying or recertifying any person as a conductor for any type of service, shall determine that the person has, in accordance with the requirements of this section, demonstrated sufficient knowledge of the railroad's rules and practices for the safe movement of trains.

(c) In order to make the knowledge determination required by paragraph (b) of this section, a railroad shall have procedures for testing a person being evaluated for certification as a conductor that shall be:

(1) Designed to examine a person's knowledge of the railroad's operating rules and practices for the safe movement of trains;

(2) Objective in nature;

(3) Administered in written or electronic form;

(4) Cover the following subjects:

(i) Safety and operating rules;

(ii) Timetable instructions;

(iii) Compliance with all applicable Federal regulations;

(iv) Physical characteristics of the territory on which a person will be or is currently serving as a conductor; and

(v) Use of any job aid that a railroad may provide a conductor;

(5) Sufficient to accurately measure the person's knowledge of the covered subjects; and

(6) Conducted without open reference books or other materials except to the degree the person is being tested on his or her ability to use such reference books or materials.

(d) The conduct of the test shall be documented in writing and the documentation shall contain sufficient information to identify the relevant facts relied on for evaluation purposes.

(e) For purposes of paragraph (c) of this section, the railroad must provide the person(s) being tested with an opportunity to consult with a supervisory employee, who possesses territorial qualifications for the territory, to explain a question.

(f) The documentation shall indicate whether the person passed or failed the test.

(g) If a person fails to pass the test, no railroad shall permit or require that person to function as a conductor prior to that person's achieving a passing score during a reexamination of the person's knowledge.

§ 242.123 Monitoring operational performance.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with a program that meets the requirements of this section. When any person including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee violates any requirement of a program which complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) Each railroad shall have a program to monitor the conduct of its certified conductors by performing unannounced operating rules compliance tests. The program shall include procedures to address the testing of certified conductors who are not given an unannounced compliance test in a calendar year pursuant to paragraph (f) of this section. At a minimum, such procedures shall include the following:

(1) A requirement that an unannounced compliance test must be conducted within 30 days of a return to conductor service; and

(2) The railroad must retain a written record indicating the date that the conductor stopped performing service that requires certification pursuant to this part, the date that the conductor returned to performing service that requires certification pursuant to this part, and the date that the unannounced compliance test was performed.

(c) Except as provided in paragraph (f) of this section, each conductor shall be given at least one unannounced compliance test in each calendar year by a railroad officer who meets the requirements of § 217.9(b)(1) of this chapter.

(d) The unannounced test program shall:

(1) Test those persons certified as a conductor pursuant to § 242.107(b)(1) for compliance with one or more operational tests in accordance with the provisions of § 217.9 of this chapter; and one or more provisions of §§ 218.99 through 218.109 of this chapter; and

(2) Test those persons certified as a passenger conductor pursuant to § 242.107(b)(2) for compliance with one or more operational tests in accordance with the provisions of § 217.9 of this chapter.

(i) For persons certified as passenger conductors pursuant to § 242.107(b)(2) who do not require compliance with part 218, subpart F of this chapter except under emergency circumstances, the requirement for an annual, unannounced test on the requirements of part 218, subpart F may be satisfied by annual training.

(ii) [Reserved]

(e) Each railroad's program shall indicate the action the railroad will take in the event that it finds deficiencies with a conductor's performance during an unannounced compliance test administered in accordance with this section.

(f) A certified conductor who is not performing a service that requires certification pursuant to this part need not be given an unannounced compliance test. However, when the certified conductor returns to a service that requires certification pursuant to this part, that certified conductor must be tested pursuant to this section within 30 days of his or her return.

§ 242.125 Certification determinations made by other railroads.

(a) A railroad that is considering certification of a person as a conductor may rely on determinations made by another railroad concerning that person's certification. The railroad's certification program shall address how the railroad will administer the training of previously uncertified conductors with extensive operating experience or previously certified conductors who have had their certification expire. If a railroad's certification program fails to specify how it will train a previously certified conductor hired from another railroad, then the railroad shall require the newly hired conductor to take the hiring railroad's entire training program.

(b) A railroad relying on another railroad's certification shall determine that:

(1) The prior certification is still valid in accordance with the provisions of §§ 242.201 and 242.407;

(2) The prior certification was for the same type of service as the certification being issued under this section;

(3) The person has received training on the physical characteristics of the new territory in accordance with § 242.119; and

(4) The person has demonstrated the necessary knowledge concerning the railroad's operating rules in accordance with § 242.121.

§ 242.127 Reliance on qualification requirements of other countries.

A Canadian railroad that is required to comply with this regulation or a railroad that conducts joint operations with a Canadian railroad may certify that a person is eligible to be a conductor provided it determines that:

(a) The person is employed by the Canadian railroad; and

(b) The person meets or exceeds the qualifications standards issued by Transport Canada for such service.

Subpart C—Administration of the Certification Program

§ 242.201 Time limitations for certification.

(a) After the pertinent date in § 242.105(d) or (e), a railroad shall not certify or recertify a person as a conductor in any type of service, if the railroad is making:

(1) A determination concerning eligibility under §§ 242.111, 242.113, 242.115, and 242.403 and the eligibility data being relied on was furnished more than 366 days before the date of the railroad's certification decision;

(2) A determination concerning visual and hearing acuity and the medical examination being relied on was conducted more than 450 days before the date of the railroad's certification decision;

(3) A determination concerning demonstrated knowledge and the knowledge examination being relied on was conducted more than 366 days before the date of the railroad's certification decision; or

(4) A determination concerning demonstrated knowledge and the knowledge examination being relied on was conducted more than 24 months before the date of the railroad's recertification decision if the railroad administers a knowledge testing program pursuant to § 242.121 at intervals that do not exceed 24 months.

(b) The time limitations of paragraph (a) of this section do not apply to a railroad that is making a certification decision in reliance on determinations made by another railroad in accordance with paragraph (c)(3) of this section, § 242.125, or § 242.127.

(c) No railroad shall:

(1) Permit or require a person, designated under § 242.105(a) or (b), to perform service as a certified conductor for more than the 36-month period beginning on the pertinent date for compliance with the mandatory procedures for testing and evaluation set forth in the applicable provisions of § 242.105(d) or (e) unless that person has been determined to be eligible in accordance with procedures that comply with subpart B of this part.

(2) Certify a person as a conductor for an interval of more than 36 months; or

(3) Rely on a certification issued by another railroad that is more than 36 months old.

(d) Except as provided for in § 242.105 concerning initial implementation of the program, a railroad shall issue each person designated as a certified conductor a certificate that complies with § 242.207 no later than 30 days from the date of its decision to certify or recertify that person.

§ 242.203 Retaining information supporting determinations.

(a) After the pertinent date in § 242.105(d) or (e), a railroad that issues, denies, or revokes a certificate after making the determinations required under § 242.109 shall maintain a record for each certified conductor or applicant for certification that contains the information the railroad relied on in making the determinations.

(b) A railroad shall retain the following information:

(1) Relevant data from the railroad's records concerning the person's prior safety conduct;

(2) Relevant data furnished by another railroad;

(3) Relevant data furnished by a governmental agency concerning the person's motor vehicle driving record;

(4) Relevant data furnished by the person seeking certification concerning his or her eligibility;

(5) The relevant test results data concerning hearing and vision acuity;

(6) If applicable, the relevant data concerning the professional opinion of the railroad's medical examiner on the adequacy of the person's hearing or vision acuity;

(7) Relevant data from the railroad's records concerning the person's success or failure of the passage of knowledge test(s) under § 242.121;

(8) A sample copy of the written knowledge test or tests administered; and

(9) The relevant data from the railroad's records concerning the person's success or failure on unannounced operating rules compliance tests the railroad performed to monitor the conductor's performance in accordance with § 242.123.

(c) If a railroad is relying on successful completion of an approved training program conducted by another entity, the relying railroad shall maintain a record for each certified conductor that contains the relevant data furnished by the training entity concerning the person's demonstration of knowledge and relied on by the railroad in making its determinations.

(d) If a railroad is relying on a certification decision initially made by another railroad, the relying railroad shall maintain a record for each certified conductor that contains the relevant data furnished by the other railroad which it relied on in making its determinations.

(e) All records required under this section shall be retained for a period of six years from the date of the certification, recertification, denial or revocation decision and shall be made available to FRA representatives upon request during normal business hours.

(f) It shall be unlawful for any railroad to knowingly or any individual to willfully:

(1) Make, cause to be made, or participate in the making of a false entry on the record(s) required by this section; or

(2) Otherwise falsify such records through material misstatement, omission, or mutilation.

(g) Nothing in this section precludes a railroad from maintaining the information required to be retained under this section in an electronic format provided that:

(1) The railroad maintains an information technology security program adequate to ensure the integrity of the electronic data storage system, including the prevention of unauthorized access to the program logic or individual records;

(2) The program and data storage system must be protected by a security system that utilizes an employee identification number and password, or a comparable method, to establish appropriate levels of program access meeting all of the following standards:

(i) No two individuals have the same electronic identity; and

(ii) A record cannot be deleted or altered by any individual after the record is certified by the employee who created the record;

(3) Any amendment to a record is either:

(i) Electronically stored apart from the record that it amends; or

(ii) Electronically attached to the record as information without changing the original record;

(4) Each amendment to a record uniquely identifies the person making the amendment;

(5) The system employed by the railroad for data storage permits reasonable access and retrieval of the information in usable format when requested to furnish data by FRA representatives; and

(6) Information retrieved from the system can be easily produced in a printed format which can be readily provided to FRA representatives in a timely manner and authenticated by a designated representative of the railroad as a true and accurate copy of the railroad's records if requested to do so by FRA representatives.

§ 242.205 Identification of certified persons and recordkeeping.

(a) After September 1, 2012, a railroad shall maintain a list identifying each person designated as a certified conductor. That list shall indicate the types of service the railroad determines each person is authorized to perform and date of the railroad's certification decision.

(b) If a railroad employs conductors working in joint operations territory, the list shall include person(s) determined by that railroad to be certified as conductor(s) and possessing the necessary territorial qualifications for the applicable territory in accordance with § 242.301.

(c) The list required by paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section shall:

(1) Be updated at least annually;

(2) Be available at the divisional or regional headquarters of the railroad; and

(3) Be available for inspection or copying by FRA during regular business hours.

(d) It shall be unlawful for any railroad to knowingly or any individual to willfully:

(1) Make, cause to be made, or participate in the making of a false entry on the list required by this section; or

(2) Otherwise falsify such list through material misstatement, omission, or mutilation.

(e) Nothing in this section precludes a railroad from maintaining the list required this section in an electronic format provided that:

(1) The railroad maintains an information technology security program adequate to ensure the integrity of the electronic data storage system, including the prevention of unauthorized access to the program logic or the list;

(2) The program and data storage system must be protected by a security system that utilizes an employee identification number and password, or a comparable method, to establish appropriate levels of program access meeting all of the following standards:

(i) No two individuals have the same electronic identity; and

(ii) An entry on the list cannot be deleted or altered by any individual after the entry is certified by the employee who created the entry;

(3) Any amendment to the list is either:

(i) Electronically stored apart from the entry on the list that it amends; or

(ii) Electronically attached to the entry on the list as information without changing the original entry;

(4) Each amendment to the list uniquely identifies the person making the amendment;

(5) The system employed by the railroad for data storage permits reasonable access and retrieval of the information in usable format when requested to furnish data by FRA representatives; and

(6) Information retrieved from the system can be easily produced in a printed format which can be readily provided to FRA representatives in a timely manner and authenticated by a designated representative of the railroad as a true and accurate copy of the railroad's records if requested to do so by FRA representatives.

[76 FR 69841, Nov. 9, 2011, as amended at 77 FR 6491, Feb. 8, 2012]

§ 242.207 Certificate components.

(a) At a minimum, each certificate issued in compliance with this part shall:

(1) Identify the railroad or parent company that is issuing it;

(2) Indicate that the railroad, acting in conformity with this part, has determined that the person to whom it is being issued has been determined to be eligible to perform as a conductor or as a passenger conductor;

(3) Identify the person to whom it is being issued (including the person's name, employee identification number, the year of birth, and either a physical description or photograph of the person);

(4) Identify any conditions or limitations, including the type of service or conditions to ameliorate vision or hearing acuity deficiencies, that restrict the person's operational authority;

(5) Show the effective date of each certification held;

(6) Be signed by an individual designated in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section; and

(7) Be of sufficiently small size to permit being carried in an ordinary pocket wallet.

(b) Each railroad shall designate in writing any person that it authorizes to sign the certificates described in this section. The designation shall identify such persons by name or job title.

(c) Nothing in paragraph (a) of this section shall prohibit any railroad from including additional information on the certificate or supplementing the certificate through other documents.

(d) It shall be unlawful for any railroad to knowingly or any individual to willfully:

(1) Make, cause to be made, or participate in the making of a false entry on that certificate; or

(2) Otherwise falsify that certificate through material misstatement, omission, or mutilation.

§ 242.209 Maintenance of the certificate.

(a) Each conductor who has received a certificate required under this part shall:

(1) Have that certificate in his or her possession while on duty as a conductor; and

(2) Display that certificate upon the receipt of a request to do so from:

(i) A representative of the Federal Railroad Administration,

(ii) A State inspector authorized under part 212 of this chapter,

(iii) An officer of the issuing railroad, or

(iv) An officer of another railroad when serving as a conductor in joint operations territory.

(b) Any conductor who is notified or called to serve as a conductor and such service would cause the conductor to exceed certificate limitations, set forth in accordance with subpart B of this part, shall immediately notify the railroad that he or she is not authorized to perform that anticipated service and it shall be unlawful for the railroad to require such service.

(c) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to alter a certified conductor's duty to comply with other provisions of this chapter concerning railroad safety.

§ 242.211 Replacement of certificates.

(a) A railroad shall have a system for the prompt replacement of lost, stolen or mutilated certificates at no cost to conductors. That system shall be reasonably accessible to certified conductors in need of a replacement certificate or temporary replacement certificate.

(b) At a minimum, a temporary replacement certificate must identify the person to whom it is being issued (including the person's name, identification number and year of birth); indicate the date of issuance; and be authorized by a designated supervisor. Temporary replacement certificates may be delivered electronically and are valid for a period no greater than 30 days.

§ 242.213 Multiple certifications.

(a) A person may hold certification for multiple types of conductor service.

(b) A person may hold both conductor and locomotive engineer certification.

(c) A railroad that issues multiple certificates to a person, shall, to the extent possible, coordinate the expiration date of those certificates.

(d) Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, a locomotive engineer, including a remote control operator, who is operating a locomotive without an assigned certified conductor must either be:

(1) Certified as both a locomotive engineer under part 240 of this chapter and as a conductor under this part; or

(2) Accompanied by a person certified as a conductor under this part but who will be attached to the crew in a manner similar to that of an independent assignment.

(e) If the conductor is removed from a passenger train for a medical, police or other such emergency after the train departs from an initial terminal, the train may proceed to the first location where the conductor can be replaced without incurring undue delay without the locomotive engineer being a certified conductor. However, an assistant conductor or brakeman must be on the train and the locomotive engineer must be informed that there is no certified conductor on the train prior to any movement.

(f) During the duration of any certification interval, a person who holds a current conductor and/or locomotive engineer certificate from more than one railroad shall immediately notify the other certifying railroad(s) if he or she is denied conductor or locomotive engineer recertification under § 242.401 or § 240.219 of this chapter or has his or her conductor or locomotive engineer certification revoked under § 242.407 or § 240.307 of this chapter by another railroad.

(g) A person who is certified to perform multiple types of conductor service and who has had any of those certifications revoked under § 242.407 may not perform any type of conductor service during the period of revocation.

(h) A person who holds a current conductor and locomotive engineer certificate and who has had his or her conductor certification revoked under § 242.407 for a violation of § 242.403(e)(1) through (5) or (e)(12) may not work as a locomotive engineer during the period of revocation. However, a person who holds a current conductor and locomotive engineer certificate and who has had his or her conductor certification revoked under § 242.407 for a violation of § 242.403(e)(6) through (11) may work as a locomotive engineer during the period of revocation.

(1) For purposes of determining the period for which a person may not work as a certified locomotive engineer due to a revocation of his or her conductor certification, only violations of § 242.403(e)(1) through (5) or (e)(12) will be counted. Thus, a person who holds a current conductor and locomotive engineer certificate and who has had his or her conductor certification revoked three times in less than 36 months for two violations of § 242.403(e)(6) and one violation of § 242.403(e)(1) would have his or her conductor certificate revoked for 1 year, but would not be permitted to work as a locomotive engineer for one month (i.e., the period of revocation for one violation of § 242.403(e)(1)).

(i) A person who holds a current conductor and locomotive engineer certificate and who has had his or her locomotive engineer certification revoked under § 240.307 of this chapter may not work as a conductor during the period of revocation.

(j) A person who has had his or her locomotive engineer certification revoked under § 240.307 of this chapter may not obtain a conductor certificate pursuant to this part during the period of revocation.

(k) A person who had his or her conductor certification revoked under § 242.407 for violations of § 242.403(e)(1) through (5) or (e)(12) may not obtain a locomotive engineer certificate pursuant to part 240 of this chapter during the period of revocation.

(l) A railroad that denies a person conductor certification or recertification under § 242.401 shall not, solely on the basis of that denial, deny or revoke that person's locomotive engineer certification or recertification.

(m) A railroad that denies a person locomotive engineer certification or recertification under § 240.219 of this chapter shall not, solely on the basis of that denial, deny or revoke that person's conductor certification or recertification.

(n) In lieu of issuing multiple certificates, a railroad may issue one certificate to a person who is certified to perform multiple types of conductor service or is certified as a conductor and a locomotive engineer. The certificate must comply with § 240.223 of this chapter and § 242.207.

(o) A person who holds a current conductor and locomotive engineer certificate and who is involved in a revocable event under § 242.407 or § 240.307 of this chapter may only have one certificate revoked for that event. The determination by the railroad as to which certificate to revoke for the revocable event must be based on the work the person was performing at the time the event occurred.

[76 FR 69841, Nov. 9, 2011, as amended at 85 FR 81325, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 242.215 Railroad oversight responsibilities.

(a) No later than March 31 of each year (beginning in calendar year 2014), each Class I railroad (including the National Railroad Passenger Corporation and a railroad providing commuter service) and each Class II railroad shall conduct a formal annual review and analysis concerning the administration of its program for responding to detected instances of poor safety conduct by certified conductors during the prior calendar year.

(b) Each review and analysis shall involve:

(1) The number and nature of the instances of detected poor safety conduct including the nature of the remedial action taken in response thereto;

(2) The number and nature of FRA reported train accidents attributed to poor safety performance by conductors;

(3) The number and type of operational monitoring test failures recorded by railroad officers who meet the requirements of § 217.9(b)(1) of this chapter; and

(4) If the railroad conducts joint operations with another railroad, the number of conductors employed by the other railroad(s) which: were involved in events described in this paragraph and were determined to be certified and to have possessed the necessary territorial qualifications for joint operations purposes by the controlling railroad.

(c) Based on that review and analysis, each railroad shall determine what action(s) it will take to improve the safety of railroad operations to reduce or eliminate future incidents of that nature.

(d) If requested in writing by FRA, the railroad shall provide a report of the findings and conclusions reached during such annual review and analysis effort.

(e) For reporting purposes, information about the nature of detected poor safety conduct shall be capable of segregation for study and evaluation purposes into the following categories:

(1) Incidents involving noncompliance with part 218 of this chapter;

(2) Incidents involving noncompliance with part 219 of this chapter;

(3) Incidents involving noncompliance with the procedures for the safe use of train or engine brakes when the procedures are required for compliance with the Class I, Class IA, Class II, Class III, or transfer train brake test provisions of part 232 of this chapter or when the procedures are required for compliance with the Class 1, Class 1A, Class II, or running brake test provisions of part 238 of this chapter;

(4) Incidents involving noncompliance with the railroad's operating rules involving operation of a locomotive or train to operate at a speed that exceeds the maximum authorized limit;

(5) Incidents involving noncompliance with the railroad's operating rules resulting in operation of a locomotive or train past any signal, excluding a hand or a radio signal indication or a switch, that requires a complete stop before passing it;

(6) Incidents involving noncompliance with the provisions of restricted speed, and the operational equivalent thereof, that must be reported under the provisions of part 225 of this chapter;

(7) Incidents involving occupying main track or a segment of main track without proper authority or permission; and

(8) Incidents involving the failure to comply with prohibitions against tampering with locomotive mounted safety devices, or knowingly operating or permitting to be operated a train with an unauthorized or disabled safety device in the controlling locomotive.

(f) For reporting purposes, an instance of poor safety conduct involving a person who holds both conductor certification pursuant to this part and locomotive engineer certification pursuant to part 240 of this chapter need only be reported once (either under 49 CFR 240.309 of this chapter or this section). The determination as to where to report the instance of poor safety conduct should be based on the work the person was performing at the time the conduct occurred.

(g) For reporting purposes each category of detected poor safety conduct identified in paragraph (b) of this section shall be capable of being annotated to reflect the following:

(1) The nature of the remedial action taken and the number of events subdivided so as to reflect which of the following actions was selected:

(i) Imposition of informal discipline;

(ii) Imposition of formal discipline;

(iii) Provision of informal training; or

(iv) Provision of formal training; and

(2) If the nature of the remedial action taken was formal discipline, the number of events further subdivided so as to reflect which of the following punishments was imposed by the railroad:

(i) The person was withheld from service;

(ii) The person was dismissed from employment or

(iii) The person was issued demerits. If more than one form of punishment was imposed only that punishment deemed the most severe shall be shown.

(h) For reporting purposes each category of detected poor safety conduct identified in paragraph (b) of this section which resulted in the imposition of formal or informal discipline shall be annotated to reflect the following:

(1) The number of instances in which the railroad's internal appeals process reduced the punishment initially imposed at the conclusion of its hearing; and

(2) The number of instances in which the punishment imposed by the railroad was reduced by any of the following entities: The National Railroad Adjustment Board, a Public Law Board, a Special Board of Adjustment or other body for the resolution of disputes duly constituted under the provisions of the Railway Labor Act.

(i) For reporting purposes, each category of detected poor safety conduct identified in paragraph (b) of this section shall be capable of being annotated to reflect the following:

(1) The total number of incidents in that category;

(2) The number of incidents within that total which reflect incidents requiring an FRA accident/incident report under part 225 of this chapter; and

(3) The number of incidents within that total which were detected as a result of a scheduled operational monitoring effort.

[76 FR 69841, Nov. 9, 2011, as amended at 77 FR 6491, Feb. 8, 2012]

Subpart D—Territorial Qualification and Joint Operations

§ 242.301 Requirements for territorial qualification.

(a) Except as provided in paragraph (c), (d), or (e) of this section, a railroad, including a railroad that employs conductors working in joint operations territory, shall not permit or require a person to serve as a conductor unless that railroad determines that the person is certified as a conductor and possesses the necessary territorial qualifications for the applicable territory pursuant to § 242.119.

(b) Each person who is called to serve as a conductor shall:

(1) Meet the territorial qualification requirements on the segment of track upon which he or she will serve as a conductor; and

(2) Immediately notify the railroad upon which he or she is employed if he or she does not meet the required territorial qualifications.

(c) Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, if a conductor lacks territorial qualification on main track physical characteristics required by paragraph (a) of this section, he or she shall be assisted by a person who meets the territorial qualification requirements for main track physical characteristics.

(1) For a conductor who has never been qualified on main track physical characteristics of the territory over which he or she is to serve as a conductor, the assistant shall be a person who is certified as a conductor, meets the territorial qualification requirements for main track physical characteristics, and is not an assigned crew member.

(2) For a conductor who was previously qualified on main track physical characteristics of the territory over which he or she is to serve as a conductor, but whose qualification has been expired for one year or less and who regularly traversed the territory prior to the expiration of the qualification, the assistant may be any person, including an assigned crewmember, who meets the territorial qualification requirements for main track physical characteristics.

(3) For a conductor who was previously qualified on main track physical characteristics of the territory over which he or she is to serve as a conductor, and whose qualification has been expired for one year or less but who has not regularly traversed the territory prior to the expiration of the qualification, or a conductor whose territorial qualification on main track has been expired for more than a year, the assistant may be any person, including an assigned crewmember other than the locomotive engineer so long as serving as the assistant would not conflict with that crewmember's other safety sensitive duties, who meets the territorial qualification requirements for main track physical characteristics.

(d) If a conductor lacks territorial qualification on other than main track physical characteristics required by paragraph (a) of this section, where practicable, he or she shall be assisted by a person who is a certified conductor and meets the territorial qualification requirements for other than main track physical characteristics. Where not practicable, the conductor shall be provided an appropriate up-to-date job aid.

(e) An assistant is not required if the movement is on a section of main track with an average grade of less than 1% over 3 continuous miles, and

(1) The maximum distance the locomotive or train will be operated does not exceed one mile; or

(2) The maximum authorized speed for any operation on the track does not exceed 20 miles per hour; or

(3) Operations are conducted under operating rules that require every locomotive and train to proceed at a speed that permits stopping within one half the range of vision of the locomotive engineer.

[76 FR 69841, Nov. 9, 2011, as amended at 77 FR 6491, Feb. 8, 2012]

Subpart E—Denial and Revocation of Certification

§ 242.401 Denial of certification.

(a) A railroad shall notify a candidate for certification or recertification of information known to the railroad that forms the basis for denying the person certification and provide the person a reasonable opportunity to explain or rebut that adverse information in writing prior to denying certification. A railroad shall provide the conductor candidate with any written documents or records, including written statements, related to failure to meet a requirement of this part which support its pending denial decision.

(b) This section does not require further opportunity to comment if the railroad's denial is based solely on factors addressed by §§ 242.111, 242.115, or 242.403 and the opportunity to comment afforded by § 242.109 has been provided.

(c) If a railroad denies a person certification or recertification, it shall notify the person of the adverse decision and explain, in writing, the basis for its denial decision. The basis for a railroad's denial decision shall address any explanation or rebuttal information that the conductor candidate may have provided in writing pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section. The document explaining the basis for the denial shall be served on the person within 10 days after the railroad's decision and shall give the date of the decision.

(d) A railroad shall not deny the person's certification for failing to comply with a railroad operating rule or practice which constitutes a violation under § 242.403(e)(1) through (11) of this part if sufficient evidence exists to establish that an intervening cause prevented or materially impaired the conductor's ability to comply with that railroad operating rule or practice.

§ 242.403 Criteria for revoking certification.

(a) Each railroad shall adopt and comply with a program which meets the requirements of this section. When any person including, but not limited to, each railroad, railroad officer, supervisor, and employee violates any requirement of a program which complies with the requirements of this section, that person shall be considered to have violated the requirements of this section.

(b) It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with any of the railroad rules and practices described in paragraph (e) of this section.

(c) (1) A certified conductor who has demonstrated a failure to comply with railroad rules and practices described in paragraph (e) of this section shall have his or her certification revoked.

(2) A certified conductor who is monitoring, piloting, or instructing a conductor and fails to take appropriate action to prevent a violation of paragraph (e) of this section shall have his or her certification revoked. Appropriate action does not mean that a supervisor, pilot, or instructor must prevent a violation from occurring at all costs; the duty may be met by warning the conductor or the engineer, as appropriate, of a potential or foreseeable violation.

(3) A certified conductor who is called by a railroad to perform the duty of a train crew member other than that of conductor or locomotive engineer shall not have his or her certification revoked based on actions taken or not taken while performing that duty.

(d) In determining whether a person may be or remain certified as a conductor, a railroad shall consider as operating rule compliance data only conduct described in paragraphs (e)(1) through (11) of this section that occurred within a period of 36 consecutive months prior to the determination. A review of an existing certification shall be initiated promptly upon the occurrence and documentation of any conduct described in this section.

(e) A railroad shall only consider violations of its operating rules and practices that involve:

(1) Failure to take appropriate action to prevent the locomotive engineer of the train the conductor is assigned to from failing to control a locomotive or train in accordance with a signal indication, excluding a hand or a radio signal indication or a switch, that requires a complete stop before passing it, when the conductor is located in the operating cab, or otherwise has knowledge of the signal indication. Appropriate action does not mean that a conductor must prevent a violation from occurring at all costs; the duty may be met by warning an engineer of a potential or foreseeable violation.

(2) Failure to take appropriate action to prevent the locomotive engineer of the train the conductor is assigned to from failing to adhere to the following limitations concerning train speed:

(i) When the conductor is located in the operating cab and the speed at which the train was operated exceeds the maximum authorized limit by at least 10 miles per hour. Where restricted speed is in effect, railroads shall consider only those violations of the conditional clause of restricted speed rules (i.e., the clause that requires stopping within one half of the locomotive engineer's range of vision), or the operational equivalent thereof, which cause reportable accidents or incidents under part 225 of this chapter, except for accidents and incidents that are classified as “covered data” under § 225.5 of this chapter. Appropriate action does not mean that a conductor must prevent a violation from occurring at all costs; the duty may be met by warning an engineer of a potential or foreseeable violation.

(ii) When not in the operating cab, the conductor is deemed to have taken appropriate action when in compliance with all applicable Railroad Operating Rules and Special Instructions.

(3) Failure to perform or have knowledge that a required brake test was performed pursuant to the Class I, Class IA, Class II, Class III, or transfer train brake test provisions of part 232 of this chapter or the Class 1, Class 1A, Class II, or running brake test provisions of part 238 of this chapter.

(4) Failure to take appropriate action to prevent the locomotive engineer of the train the conductor is assigned to from occupying main track or a segment of main track without proper authority or permission. Appropriate action does not mean that a conductor must prevent a violation from occurring at all costs; the duty may be met by warning an engineer of a potential or foreseeable violation.

(5) Failure to comply with prohibitions against tampering with locomotive mounted safety devices; knowingly fail to take appropriate action to prevent the locomotive engineer of the train the conductor is assigned to from failing to comply with prohibitions against tampering with locomotive mounted safety devices; or knowingly fail to take appropriate action to prevent the locomotive engineer of the train the conductor is assigned to from operating or permitting to be operated a train with an unauthorized disabled safety device in the controlling locomotive. (See 49 CFR part 218, subpart D and appendix C to part 218);

(6) Failure to comply with the provisions of § 218.99 of this chapter (Shoving or pushing movements). Railroads shall only consider those violations of § 218.99 of this chapter which cause reportable accidents or incidents under part 225 of this chapter, except for accidents and incidents that are classified as “covered data” under § 225.5 of this chapter.

(7) Failure to comply with the provisions of § 218.101 of this chapter (Leaving rolling and on-track maintenance-of-way equipment in the clear). Railroads shall only consider those violations of § 218.101 of this chapter which cause reportable accidents or incidents under part 225 of this chapter, except for accidents and incidents that are classified as “covered data” under § 225.5 of this chapter.

(8) Failure to comply with the provisions of § 218.103 of this chapter (Hand-operated switches, including crossover switches). Railroads shall only consider those violations of § 218.103 of this chapter which cause reportable accidents or incidents under part 225 of this chapter, except for accidents and incidents that are classified as “covered data” under § 225.5 of this chapter.

(9) Failure to comply with the provisions of § 218.105 of this chapter (Additional operational requirements for hand-operated main track switches). Railroads shall only consider those violations of § 218.105 of this chapter which cause reportable accidents or incidents under part 225 of this chapter, except for accidents and incidents that are classified as “covered data” under § 225.5 of this chapter.

(10) Failure to comply with the provisions of § 218.107 of this chapter (Additional operational requirements for hand-operated crossover switches). Railroads shall only consider those violations of § 218.107 of this chapter which cause reportable accidents or incidents under part 225 of this chapter, except for accidents and incidents that are classified as “covered data” under § 225.5 of this chapter.

(11) Failure to comply with the provisions of § 218.109 of this chapter (Hand-operated fixed derails). Railroads shall only consider those violations of § 218.109 of this chapter which cause reportable accidents or incidents under part 225 of this chapter, except for accidents and incidents that are classified as “covered data” under § 225.5 of this chapter.

(12) Failure to comply with § 219.101 of this chapter; however such incidents shall be considered as a violation only for the purposes of § 242.405(a)(2) and (3).

(f) (1) If in any single incident the person's conduct contravened more than one operating rule or practice, that event shall be treated as a single violation for the purposes of this section.

(2) A violation of one or more operating rules or practices described in paragraphs (e)(1) through (11) of this section that occurs during a properly conducted operational compliance test subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be counted in determining the periods of ineligibility described in § 242.405.

(3) An operational test that is not conducted in compliance with this part, a railroad's operating rules, or a railroad's program under § 217.9 of this chapter, will not be considered a legitimate test of operational skill or knowledge, and will not be considered for certification, recertification or revocation purposes.

(4) A railroad shall not be permitted to deny or revoke an employee's certification based upon additional conditions or operational restrictions imposed pursuant to § 242.107(d).

[76 FR 69841, Nov. 9, 2011, as amended at 85 FR 81325, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 242.405 Periods of ineligibility.

(a) A period of ineligibility described in this paragraph shall:

(1) Begin, for a person not currently certified, on the date of the railroad's written determination that the most recent incident has occurred; or

(2) Begin, for a person currently certified, on the date of the railroad's notification to the person that recertification has been denied or certification has been revoked; and

(3) Be determined according to the following standards:

(i) On other than main track where restricted speed or the operational equivalent thereof is in effect, the period of revocation for a violation of § 242.403(e)(6) through (8), (10), or (11) shall be reduced by one half provided that another revocable event has not occurred within the previous 12 months.

(ii) In the case of a single incident involving violation of one or more of the operating rules or practices described in § 242.403(e)(1) through (11), the person shall have his or her certificate revoked for a period of 30 calendar days.

(iii) In the case of two separate incidents involving a violation of one or more of the operating rules or practices described in § 242.403(e)(1) through (11), that occurred within 24 months of each other, the person shall have his or her certificate revoked for a period of six months.

(iv) In the case of three separate incidents involving violations of one or more of the operating rules or practices, described in § 242.403(e)(1) through (12), that occurred within 36 months of each other, the person shall have his or her certificate revoked for a period of one year.

(v) In the case of four separate incidents involving violations of one or more of the operating rules or practices, described in § 242.403(e)(1) through (12), that occurred within 36 months of each other, the person shall have his or her certificate revoked for a period of three years.

(vi) Where, based on the occurrence of violations described in § 242.403(e)(12), different periods of ineligibility may result under the provisions of this section and § 242.115, the longest period of revocation shall control.

(b) Any or all periods of revocation provided in paragraph (a) of this section may consist of training.

(c) Reduction in period of ineligibility: A person whose certification is denied or revoked shall be eligible for grant or reinstatement of the certificate prior to the expiration of the initial period of ineligibility only if:

(1) The denial or revocation of certification in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (a)(3) of this section is for a period of one year or less;

(2) Certification is denied or revoked for reasons other than noncompliance with § 219.101 of this chapter;

(3) The person is evaluated by a railroad officer and determined to have received adequate remedial training;

(4) The person successfully completes any mandatory program of training or retraining, if that is determined to be necessary by the railroad prior to return to service; and

(5) At least one half the pertinent period of ineligibility specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this section has elapsed.

§ 242.407 Process for revoking certification.

(a) Except as provided for in § 242.115(g), a railroad that certifies or recertifies a person as a conductor and, during the period that certification is valid, acquires reliable information regarding violation(s) of § 242.403(e) or § 242.115(e) of this chapter shall revoke the person's conductor certificate.

(b) Pending a revocation determination under this section, the railroad shall:

(1) Upon receipt of reliable information regarding violation(s) of § 242.403(e) or § 242.115(e) of this chapter, immediately suspend the person's certificate;

(2) Prior to or upon suspending the person's certificate, provide notice of the reason for the suspension, the pending revocation, and an opportunity for a hearing before a presiding officer other than the investigating officer. The notice may initially be given either orally or in writing. If given orally, it must be confirmed in writing and the written confirmation must be made promptly. Written confirmation which conforms to the notification provisions of an applicable collective bargaining agreement shall be deemed to satisfy the written confirmation requirements of this section. In the absence of an applicable collective bargaining agreement provision, the written confirmation must be made within 96 hours.

(3) Convene the hearing within the deadline prescribed by either paragraph (c)(1) of this section or the applicable collective bargaining agreement as permitted under paragraph (d) of this section;

(4) No later than the convening of the hearing and notwithstanding the terms of an applicable collective bargaining agreement, the railroad convening the hearing shall provide the person with a copy of the written information and list of witnesses the railroad will present at the hearing. If requested, a recess to the start of the hearing will be granted if that information is not provided until just prior to the convening of the hearing. If the information was provided through statements of an employee of the convening railroad, the railroad will make that employee available for examination during the hearing required by paragraph (b)(3) of this section. Examination may be telephonic where it is impractical to provide the witness at the hearing.

(5) Determine, on the record of the hearing, whether the person no longer meets the certification requirements of this part stating explicitly the basis for the conclusion reached;

(6) When appropriate, impose the pertinent period of revocation provided for in § 242.405 or § 242.115; and

(7) Retain the record of the hearing for 3 years after the date the decision is rendered.

(c) Except as provided for in paragraphs (d), (f), (i), and (j) of this section, a hearing required by this section shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures:

(1) The hearing shall be convened within 10 days of the date the certificate is suspended unless the conductor requests or consents to delay in the start of the hearing.

(2) The hearing shall be conducted by a presiding officer, who can be any proficient person authorized by the railroad other than the investigating officer.

(3) The presiding officer will exercise the powers necessary to regulate the conduct of the hearing for the purpose of achieving a prompt and fair determination of all material issues in controversy.

(4) The presiding officer shall convene and preside over the hearing.

(5) Testimony by witnesses at the hearing shall be recorded verbatim.

(6) All relevant and probative evidence shall be received unless the presiding officer determines the evidence to be unduly repetitive or so extensive and lacking in relevancy that its admission would impair the prompt, orderly, and fair resolution of the proceeding.

(7) The presiding officer may:

(i) Adopt any needed procedures for the submission of evidence in written form;

(ii) Examine witnesses at the hearing;

(iii) Convene, recess, adjourn or otherwise regulate the course of the hearing; and

(iv) Take any other action authorized by or consistent with the provisions of this part and permitted by law that may expedite the hearing or aid in the disposition of the proceeding.

(8) Parties may appear and be heard on their own behalf or through designated representatives. Parties may offer relevant evidence including testimony and may conduct such examination of witnesses as may be required for a full disclosure of the relevant facts.

(9) The record in the proceeding shall be closed at the conclusion of the hearing unless the presiding officer allows additional time for the submission of information. In such instances the record shall be left open for such time as the presiding officer grants for that purpose.

(10) No later than 10 days after the close of the record, a railroad official, other than the investigating officer, shall prepare and sign a written decision in the proceeding.

(11) The decision shall:

(i) Contain the findings of fact as well as the basis therefor, concerning all material issues of fact presented on the record and citations to all applicable railroad rules and practices;

(ii) State whether the railroad official found that a revocable event occurred and the applicable period of revocation with a citation to 49 CFR 242.405 (Periods of revocation); and

(iii) Be served on the employee and the employee's representative, if any, with the railroad to retain proof of that service.

(12) The railroad shall have the burden of proving that the conductor's conduct was not in compliance with the applicable railroad operating rule or practice or part 219 of this chapter.

(d) A hearing required by this section which is conducted in a manner that conforms procedurally to the applicable collective bargaining agreement shall be deemed to satisfy the procedural requirements of this section.

(e) A hearing required under this section may be consolidated with any disciplinary or other hearing arising from the same facts, but in all instances a railroad official, other than the investigating officer, shall make separate findings as to the revocation required under this section.

(f) A person may waive the right to the hearing provided under this section. That waiver shall:

(1) Be made in writing;

(2) Reflect the fact that the person has knowledge and understanding of these rights and voluntarily surrenders them; and

(3) Be signed by the person making the waiver.

(g) A railroad that has relied on the certification by another railroad under the provisions of § 242.127 or § 242.301, shall revoke its certification if, during the period that certification is valid, the railroad acquires information which convinces it that another railroad has revoked its certification in accordance with the provisions of this section. The requirement to provide a hearing under this section is satisfied when any single railroad holds a hearing and no additional hearing is required prior to a revocation by more than one railroad arising from the same facts.

(h) The period of certificate suspension prior to the commencement of a hearing required under this section shall be credited towards satisfying any applicable revocation period imposed in accordance with the provisions of § 242.405.

(i) A railroad:

(1) Shall not revoke the person's certification as provided for in paragraph (a) of this section if sufficient evidence exists to establish that an intervening cause prevented or materially impaired the conductor's ability to comply with the railroad operating rule or practice which constitutes a violation under § 242.403(e)(1) through (e)(11); or

(2) May decide not to revoke the person's certification as provided for in paragraph (a) of this section if sufficient evidence exists to establish that the violation of § 242.403(e)(1) through (11) was of a minimal nature and had no direct or potential effect on rail safety.

(j) The railroad shall place the relevant information in the records maintained in compliance with § 242.215 for Class I (including the National Railroad Passenger Corporation) and Class II railroads, and § 242.203 for Class III railroads if sufficient evidence meeting the criteria provided in paragraph (i) of this section, becomes available either:

(1) Prior to a railroad's action to suspend the certificate as provided for in paragraph (b)(1) of this section; or

(2) Prior to the convening of the hearing provided for in this section;

(k) Provided that the railroad makes a good faith determination after a reasonable inquiry that the course of conduct provided for in paragraph (i) of this section is appropriate, the railroad which does not suspend a conductor's certification, as provided for in paragraph (b) of this section, is not in violation of paragraph (a) of this section.

Subpart F—Dispute Resolution Procedures

§ 242.501 Review board established.

(a) Any person who has been denied certification, denied recertification, or has had his or her certification revoked and believes that a railroad incorrectly determined that he or she failed to meet the certification requirements of this regulation when making the decision to deny or revoke certification, may petition the Federal Railroad Administrator to review the railroad's decision.

(b) The Administrator has delegated initial responsibility for adjudicating such disputes to the Operating Crew Review Board.

(c) The Operating Crew Review Board shall be composed of employees of the Federal Railroad Administration selected by the Administrator.

§ 242.503 Petition requirements.

(a) To obtain review of a railroad's decision to deny certification, deny recertification, or revoke certification, a person shall file a petition for review that complies with this section.

(b) Each petition shall:

(1) Be in writing;

(2) Be filed with the Docket Clerk, U.S. Department of Transportation, Docket Operations (M-30), West Building Ground Floor, Room W12-140, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590. The form of such request may be in written or electronic form consistent with the standards and requirements established by the Federal Docket Management System and posted on its Web site at http://www.regulations.gov.

(3) Contain all available information that the person thinks supports the person's belief that the railroad acted improperly, including:

(i) The petitioner's full name;

(ii) The petitioner's current mailing address;

(iii) The petitioner's daytime telephone number;

(iv) The petitioner's email address (if available);

(v) The name and address of the railroad; and

(vi) The facts that the petitioner believes constitute the improper action by the railroad, specifying the locations, dates, and identities of all persons who were present or involved in the railroad's actions (to the degree known by the petitioner);

(4) Explain the nature of the remedial action sought;

(5) Be supplemented by a copy of all written documents in the petitioner's possession or reasonably available to the petitioner that document that railroad's decision; and

(6) Be filed in a timely manner.

(7) Be supplemented, if requested by the Operating Crew Review Board, with a copy of the information under 49 CFR 40.329 that laboratories, medical review officers, and other service agents are required to release to employees. The petitioner must provide written explanation in response to an Operating Crew Review Board request if written documents that should be reasonably available to the petitioner are not supplied.

(c) A petition seeking review of a railroad's decision to deny certification or recertification or revoke certification in accordance with the procedures required by § 242.407 filed with FRA more than 120 days after the date the railroad's denial or revocation decision was served on the petitioner will be denied as untimely except that the Operating Crew Review Board for cause shown may extend the petition filing period at any time in its discretion:

(1) Provided that the request for extension is filed before the expiration of the period provided in this paragraph (c); or

(2) Provided that the failure to file timely was the result of excusable neglect.

(d) A party aggrieved by a Board decision to deny a petition as untimely or not in compliance with the requirements of this section may file an appeal with the Administrator in accordance with § 242.511.

[76 FR 69841, Nov. 9, 2011, as amended at 85 FR 81325, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 242.505 Processing certification review petitions.

(a) Each petition shall be acknowledged in writing by FRA. The acknowledgment shall contain the docket number assigned to the petition and a statement of FRA's intention that the Board will attempt to render a decision on this petition within 180 days from the date that the railroad's response is received or from the date upon which the railroad's response period has lapsed pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section.

(b) Upon receipt of the petition, FRA will notify the railroad that it has received the petition and where the petition may be accessed.

(c) Within 60 days from the date of the notification provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the railroad may submit to FRA any information that the railroad considers pertinent to the petition. Late filings will only be considered to the extent practicable.

(d) A railroad that submits such information shall:

(1) Identify the petitioner by name and the docket number of the review proceeding and provide the railroad's email address (if available);

(2) Serve a copy of the information being submitted to FRA to the petitioner and petitioner's representative, if any; and

(3) File the information with the Docket Clerk, U.S. Department of Transportation, Docket Operations (M-30), West Building Ground Floor, Room W12-140, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590. The form of such information may be in written or electronic form consistent with the standards and requirements established by the Federal Docket Management System and posted on its Web site at http://www.regulations.gov.

(e) Each petition will then be referred to the Operating Crew Review Board for a decision.

(f) Based on the record, the Board shall have the authority to grant, deny, dismiss or remand the petition.

(g) If the Board finds that there is insufficient basis for granting or denying the petition, the Board shall issue an order affording the parties an opportunity to provide additional information or argument consistent with its findings.

(h) When considering factual issues, the Board will determine whether there is substantial evidence to support the railroad's decision, and a negative finding is grounds for granting the petition.

(i) When considering procedural issues, the Board will determine whether the petitioner suffered substantial harm that was caused by the failure to adhere to the dictated procedures for making the railroad's decision. A finding of substantial harm is grounds for reversing the railroad's decision. To establish grounds upon which the Board may grant relief, Petitioner must show:

(1) That procedural error occurred, and

(2) The procedural error caused substantial harm.

(j) Pursuant to its reviewing role, the Board will consider whether the railroad's legal interpretations are correct based on a de novo review.

(k) The Board will determine whether the denial or revocation of certification or recertification was improper under this part (i.e., based on an incorrect determination that the person failed to meet the certification requirements of this part) and grant or deny the petition accordingly. The Board will not otherwise consider the propriety of a railroad's decision, i.e., it will not consider whether the railroad properly applied its own more stringent requirements.

(l) The Board's written decision shall be served on the petitioner, including the petitioner's representative, if any, and the railroad.

[76 FR 69841, Nov. 9, 2011, as amended at 85 FR 81325, Dec. 15, 2020]

§ 242.507 Request for a hearing.

(a) If adversely affected by the Operating Crew Review Board's decision, either the petitioner before the Board or the railroad involved shall have a right to an administrative proceeding as prescribed by § 242.509.

(b) To exercise that right, the adversely affected party shall, within 20 days of service of the Board's decision on that party, file a written request with the Docket Clerk, U.S. Department of Transportation, Docket Operations (M-30), West Building Ground Floor, Room W12-140, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590. The form of such request may be in written or electronic form consistent with the standards and requirements established by the Federal Docket Management System and posted on its Web site at http://www.regulations.gov.

(c) If a party fails to request a hearing within the period provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the Operating Crew Review Board's decision will constitute final agency action.

(d) If a party elects to request a hearing, that person shall submit a written request to the Docket Clerk containing the following:

(1) The name, address, telephone number, and email address (if available) of the respondent and the requesting party's designated representative, if any;

(2) The specific factual issues, industry rules, regulations, or laws that the requesting party alleges need to be examined in connection with the certification decision in question; and

(3) The signature of the requesting party or the requesting party's representative, if any.

(e) Upon receipt of a hearing request complying with paragraph (d) of this section, FRA shall arrange for the appointment of a presiding officer who shall schedule the hearing for the earliest practicable date.

§ 242.509 Hearings.

(a) An administrative hearing for a conductor certification petition shall be conducted by a presiding officer, who can be any person authorized by the Administrator, including an administrative law judge.

(b) The presiding officer may exercise the powers of the Administrator to regulate the conduct of the hearing for the purpose of achieving a prompt and fair determination of all material issues in controversy.

(c) The presiding officer shall convene and preside over the hearing. The hearing shall be a de novo hearing to find the relevant facts and determine the correct application of this part to those facts. The presiding officer may determine that there is no genuine issue covering some or all material facts and limit evidentiary proceedings to any issues of material fact as to which there is a genuine dispute.

(d) The presiding officer may authorize discovery of the types and quantities which in the presiding officer's discretion will contribute to a fair hearing without unduly burdening the parties. The presiding officer may impose appropriate non-monetary sanctions, including limitations as to the presentation of evidence and issues, for any party's willful failure or refusal to comply with approved discovery requests.

(e) Every petition, motion, response, or other authorized or required document shall be signed by the party filing the same, or by a duly authorized officer or representative of record, or by any other person. If signed by such other person, the reason therefor must be stated and the power of attorney or other authority authorizing such other person to subscribe the document must be filed with the document. The signature of the person subscribing any document constitutes a certification that he or she has read the document; that to the best of his or her knowledge, information and belief every statement contained in the document is true and no such statements are misleading; and that it is not interposed for delay or to be vexatious.

(f) After the request for a hearing is filed, all documents filed or served upon one party must be served upon all parties. Each party may designate a person upon whom service is to be made when not specified by law, regulation, or directive of the presiding officer. If a party does not designate a person upon whom service is to be made, then service may be made upon any person having subscribed to a submission of the party being served, unless otherwise specified by law, regulation, or directive of the presiding officer. Proof of service shall accompany all documents when they are tendered for filing.

(g) If any document initiating, filed, or served in, a proceeding is not in substantial compliance with the applicable law, regulation, or directive of the presiding officer, the presiding officer may strike or dismiss all or part of such document, or require its amendment.

(h) Any party to a proceeding may appear and be heard in person or by an authorized representative.

(i) Any person testifying at a hearing or deposition may be accompanied, represented, and advised by an attorney or other representative, and may be examined by that person.

(j) Any party may request to consolidate or separate the hearing of two or more petitions by motion to the presiding officer, when they arise from the same or similar facts or when the matters are for any reason deemed more efficiently heard together.

(k) Except as provided in § 242.507(c) and paragraph (u)(4) of this section, whenever a party has the right or is required to take action within a period prescribed by this part, or by law, regulation, or directive of the presiding officer, the presiding officer may extend such period, with or without notice, for good cause, provided another party is not substantially prejudiced by such extension. A request to extend a period which has already expired may be denied as untimely.

(l) An application to the presiding officer for an order or ruling not otherwise specifically provided for in this part shall be by motion. The motion shall be filed with the presiding officer and, if written, served upon all parties. All motions, unless made during the hearing, shall be written. Motions made during hearings may be made orally on the record, except that the presiding officer may direct that any oral motion be reduced to writing. Any motion shall state with particularity the grounds therefor and the relief or order sought, and shall be accompanied by any affidavits or other evidence desired to be relied upon which is not already part of the record. Any matter submitted in response to a written motion must be filed and served within fourteen (14) days of the motion, or within such other period as directed by the presiding officer.

(m) Testimony by witnesses at the hearing shall be given under oath and the hearing shall be recorded verbatim. The presiding officer shall give the parties to the proceeding adequate opportunity during the course of the hearing for the presentation of arguments in support of or in opposition to motions, and objections and exceptions to rulings of the presiding officer. The presiding officer may permit oral argument on any issues for which the presiding officer deems it appropriate and beneficial. Any evidence or argument received or proffered orally shall be transcribed and made a part of the record. Any physical evidence or written argument received or proffered shall be made a part of the record, except that the presiding officer may authorize the substitution of copies, photographs, or descriptions, when deemed to be appropriate.

(n) The presiding officer shall employ the Federal Rules of Evidence for United States Courts and Magistrates as general guidelines for the introduction of evidence. Notwithstanding paragraph (m) of this section, all relevant and probative evidence shall be received unless the presiding officer determines the evidence to be unduly repetitive or so extensive and lacking in relevancy that its admission would impair the prompt, orderly, and fair resolution of the proceeding.

(o) The presiding officer may:

(1) Administer oaths and affirmations;

(2) Issue subpoenas as provided for in § 209.7 of this chapter;

(3) Adopt any needed procedures for the submission of evidence in written form;

(4) Examine witnesses at the hearing;

(5) Convene, recess, adjourn or otherwise regulate the course of the hearing; and

(6) Take any other action authorized by or consistent with the provisions of this part and permitted by law that may expedite the hearing or aid in the disposition of the proceeding.

(p) The petitioner before the Operating Crew Review Board, the railroad involved in taking the certification action, and FRA shall be parties at the hearing. All parties may participate in the hearing and may appear and be heard on their own behalf or through designated representatives. All parties may offer relevant evidence, including testimony, and may conduct such cross-examination of witnesses as may be required to make a record of the relevant facts.

(q) The party requesting the administrative hearing shall be the “hearing petitioner.” The hearing petitioner shall have the burden of proving its case by a preponderance of the evidence. Hence, if the hearing petitioner is the railroad involved in taking the certification action, that railroad will have the burden of proving that its decision to deny certification, deny recertification, or revoke certification was correct. Conversely, if the petitioner before the Operating Crew Review Board is the hearing petitioner, that person will have the burden of proving that the railroad's decision to deny certification, deny recertification, or revoke certification was incorrect. The party who is not the hearing petitioner will be a respondent.

(r) FRA will be a mandatory party to the administrative hearing. At the start of each proceeding, FRA will be a respondent.

(s) The record in the proceeding shall be closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing unless the presiding officer allows additional time for the submission of additional evidence. In such instances the record shall be left open for such time as the presiding officer grants for that purpose.

(t) At the close of the record, the presiding officer shall prepare a written decision in the proceeding.

(u) The decision:

(1) Shall contain the findings of fact and conclusions of law, as well as the basis for each concerning all material issues of fact or law presented on the record;

(2) Shall be served on the hearing petitioner and all other parties to the proceeding;

(3) Shall not become final for 35 days after issuance;

(4) Constitutes final agency action unless an aggrieved party files an appeal within 35 days after issuance; and

(5) Is not precedential.

§ 242.511 Appeals.

(a) Any party aggrieved by the presiding officer's decision may file an appeal in the presiding officer's docket. The appeal must be filed within 35 days of issuance of the decision. A copy of the appeal shall be served on each party. The appeal shall set forth objections to the presiding officer's decision, supported by reference to applicable laws and regulations and with specific reference to the record. If no appeal is timely filed, the presiding officer's decision constitutes final agency action.

(b) A party may file a reply to the appeal within 25 days of service of the appeal. The reply shall be supported by reference to applicable laws and regulations and with specific reference to the record, if the party relies on evidence contained in the record.

(c) The Administrator may extend the period for filing an appeal or a response for good cause shown, provided that the written request for extension is served before expiration of the applicable period provided in this section.

(d) The Administrator has sole discretion to permit oral argument on the appeal. On the Administrator's own initiative or written motion by any party, the Administrator may grant the parties an opportunity for oral argument.

(e) The Administrator may remand, vacate, affirm, reverse, alter or modify the decision of the presiding officer and the Administrator's decision constitutes final agency action except where the terms of the Administrator's decision (for example, remanding a case to the presiding officer) show that the parties' administrative remedies have not been exhausted.

(f) An appeal from an Operating Crew Review Board decision pursuant to § 242.503(d) must be filed in the Board's docket within 35 days of issuance of the decision. A copy of the appeal shall be served on each party. The Administrator may affirm or vacate the Board's decision, and may remand the petition to the Board for further proceedings. An Administrator's decision to affirm the Board's decision constitutes final agency action.

[76 FR 69841, Nov. 9, 2011, as amended at 85 FR 81325, Dec. 15, 2020]


PART 37—TRANSPORTATION SERVICES FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES (ADA)

Authority:42 U.S.C. 12101-12213; 49 U.S.C. 322.

Source:56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, unless otherwise noted.

Subpart A—General

§ 37.1 Purpose.

The purpose of this part is to implement the transportation and related provisions of titles II and III of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.

§ 37.3 Definitions.

As used in this part:

Accessible   means, with respect to vehicles and facilities, complying with the accessibility requirements of parts 37 and 38 of this title.

The Act or ADA   means the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-336, 104 Stat. 327, 42 U.S.C. 12101-12213 and 47 U.S.C. 225 and 611), as it may be amended from time to time.

Administrator   means Administrator of the Federal Transit Administration, or his or her designee.

Alteration   means a change to an existing facility, including, but not limited to, remodeling, renovation, rehabilitation, reconstruction, historic restoration, changes or rearrangement in structural parts or elements, and changes or rearrangement in the plan configuration of walls and full-height partitions. Normal maintenance, reroofing, painting or wallpapering, asbestos removal, or changes to mechanical or electrical systems are not alterations unless they affect the usability of the building or facility.

Automated guideway transit system or AGT   means a fixed-guideway transit system which operates with automated (driverless) individual vehicles or multi-car trains. Service may be on a fixed schedule or in response to a passenger-activated call button.

Auxiliary aids and services   includes:

(1) Qualified interpreters, notetakers, transcription services, written materials, telephone headset amplifiers, assistive listening devices, assistive listening systems, telephones compatible with hearing aids, closed caption decoders, closed and open captioning, text telephones (also known as telephone devices for the deaf, or TDDs), videotext displays, or other effective methods of making aurally delivered materials available to individuals with hearing impairments;

(2) Qualified readers, taped texts, audio recordings, Brailled materials, large print materials, or other effective methods of making visually delivered materials available to individuals with visual impairments;

(3) Acquisition or modification of equipment or devices; or

(4) Other similar services or actions.

Bus   means any of several types of self-propelled vehicles, generally rubber-tired, intended for use on city streets, highways, and busways, including but not limited to minibuses, forty- and thirty-foot buses, articulated buses, double-deck buses, and electrically powered trolley buses, used by public entities to provide designated public transportation service and by private entities to provide transportation service including, but not limited to, specified public transportation services. Self-propelled, rubber-tired vehicles designed to look like antique or vintage trolleys are considered buses.

Commerce   means travel, trade, transportation, or communication among the several states, between any foreign country or any territory or possession and any state, or between points in the same state but through another state or foreign country.

Commuter authority   means any state, local, regional authority, corporation, or other entity established for purposes of providing commuter rail transportation (including, but not necessarily limited to, the New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the Connecticut Department of Transportation, the Maryland Department of Transportation, the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority, the New Jersey Transit Corporation, the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority, the Port Authority Trans-Hudson Corporation, and any successor agencies) and any entity created by one or more such agencies for the purposes of operating, or contracting for the operation of, commuter rail transportation.

Commuter bus service   means fixed route bus service, characterized by service predominantly in one direction during peak periods, limited stops, use of multi-ride tickets, and routes of extended length, usually between the central business district and outlying suburbs. Commuter bus service may also include other service, characterized by a limited route structure, limited stops, and a coordinated relationship to another mode of transportation.

Commuter rail car   means a rail passenger car obtained by a commuter authority for use in commuter rail transportation.

Commuter rail transportation   means short-haul rail passenger service operating in metropolitan and suburban areas, whether within or across the geographical boundaries of a state, usually characterized by reduced fare, multiple ride, and commutation tickets and by morning and evening peak period operations. This term does not include light or rapid rail transportation.

Demand responsive system   means any system of transporting individuals, including the provision of designated public transportation service by public entities and the provision of transportation service by private entities, including but not limited to specified public transportation service, which is not a fixed route system.

Designated public transportation   means transportation provided by a public entity (other than public school transportation) by bus, rail, or other conveyance (other than transportation by aircraft or intercity or commuter rail transportation) that provides the general public with general or special service, including charter service, on a regular and continuing basis.

Direct threat   means a significant risk to the health or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by a modification of policies, practices, procedures, or by the provision of auxiliary aids or services.

Disability   means, with respect to an individual, a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual; a record of such an impairment; or being regarded as having such an impairment.

(1) The phrase physical or mental impairment means—

(i) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs, respiratory including speech organs, cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive, genito-urinary, hemic and lymphatic, skin, and endocrine;

(ii) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities;

(iii) The term physical or mental impairment includes, but is not limited to, such contagious or noncontagious diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech, and hearing impairments; cerebral palsy, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, mental retardation, emotional illness, specific learning disabilities, HIV disease, tuberculosis, drug addiction and alcoholism;

(iv) The phrase physical or mental impairment does not include homosexuality or bisexuality.

(2) The phrase major life activities means functions such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and work.

(3) The phrase has a record of such an impairment means has a history of, or has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities.

(4) The phrase is regarded as having such an impairment means—

(i) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially limit major life activities, but which is treated by a public or private entity as constituting such a limitation;

(ii) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits a major life activity only as a result of the attitudes of others toward such an impairment; or

(iii) Has none of the impairments defined in paragraph (1) of this definition but is treated by a public or private entity as having such an impairment.

(5) The term disability does not include—

(i) Transvestism, transsexualism, pedophilia, exhibitionism, voyeurism, gender identity disorders not resulting from physical impairments, or other sexual behavior disorders;

(ii) Compulsive gambling, kleptomania, or pyromania;

(iii) Psychoactive substance abuse disorders resulting from the current illegal use of drugs.

Facility   means all or any portion of buildings, structures, sites, complexes, equipment, roads, walks, passageways, parking lots, or other real or personal property, including the site where the building, property, structure, or equipment is located.

Fixed route system   means a system of transporting individuals (other than by aircraft), including the provision of designated public transportation service by public entities and the provision of transportation service by private entities, including, but not limited to, specified public transportation service, on which a vehicle is operated along a prescribed route according to a fixed schedule.

FT Act   means the Federal Transit Act of 1964, as amended (49 U.S.C. App. 1601 et seq.).

High speed rail   means a rail service having the characteristics of intercity rail service which operates primarily on a dedicated guideway or track not used, for the most part, by freight, including, but not limited to, trains on welded rail, magnetically levitated (maglev) vehicles on a special guideway, or other advanced technology vehicles, designed to travel at speeds in excess of those possible on other types of railroads.

Individual with a disability   means a person who has a disability, but does not include an individual who is currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs, when a public or private entity acts on the basis of such use.

Intercity rail passenger car   means a rail car, intended for use by revenue passengers, obtained by the National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak) for use in intercity rail transportation.

Intercity rail transportation   means transportation provided by Amtrak.

Light rail   means a streetcar-type vehicle operated on city streets, semi-exclusive rights of way, or exclusive rights of way. Service may be provided by step-entry vehicles or by level boarding.

New vehicle   means a vehicle which is offered for sale or lease after manufacture without any prior use.

Operates   includes, with respect to a fixed route or demand responsive system, the provision of transportation service by a public or private entity itself or by a person under a contractual or other arrangement or relationship with the entity.

Origin-to-destination service   means providing service from a passenger's origin to the passenger's destination. A provider may provide ADA complementary paratransit in a curb-to-curb or door-to-door mode. When an ADA paratransit operator chooses curb-to-curb as its primary means of providing service, it must provide assistance to those passengers who need assistance beyond the curb in order to use the service unless such assistance would result in in a fundamental alteration or direct threat.

Over-the-road bus   means a bus characterized by an elevated passenger deck located over a baggage compartment.

Paratransit   means comparable transportation service required by the ADA for individuals with disabilities who are unable to use fixed route transportation systems.

Private entity   means any entity other than a public entity.

Public entity   means:

(1) Any state or local government;

(2) Any department, agency, special purpose district, or other instrumentality of one or more state or local governments; and

(3) The National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak) and any commuter authority.

Purchase or lease,   with respect to vehicles, means the time at which an entity is legally obligated to obtain the vehicles, such as the time of contract execution.

Public school transportation   means transportation by schoolbus vehicles of schoolchildren, personnel, and equipment to and from a public elementary or secondary school and school-related activities.

Rapid rail   means a subway-type transit vehicle railway operated on exclusive private rights of way with high level platform stations. Rapid rail also may operate on elevated or at grade level track separated from other traffic.

Remanufactured vehicle   means a vehicle which has been structurally restored and has had new or rebuilt major components installed to extend its service life.

Secretary   means the Secretary of Transportation or his/her designee.

Section 504   means section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Pub. L. 93-112, 87 Stat. 394, 29 U.S.C. 794), as amended.

Service animal   means any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually trained to work or perform tasks for an individual with a disability, including, but not limited to, guiding individuals with impaired vision, alerting individuals with impaired hearing to intruders or sounds, providing minimal protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, or fetching dropped items.

Small operator   means, in the context of over-the-road buses (OTRBs), a private entity primarily in the business of transporting people that is not a Class I motor carrier. To determine whether an operator has sufficient average annual gross transportation operating revenues to be a Class I motor carrier, its revenues are combined with those of any other OTRB operator with which it is affiliated.

Solicitation   means the closing date for the submission of bids or offers in a procurement.

Specified public transportation   means transportation by bus, rail, or any other conveyance (other than aircraft) provided by a private entity to the general public, with general or special service (including charter service) on a regular and continuing basis.

Station   means, with respect to intercity and commuter rail transportation, the portion of a property located appurtenant to a right of way on which intercity or commuter rail transportation is operated, where such portion is used by the general public and is related to the provision of such transportation, including passenger platforms, designated waiting areas, restrooms, and, where a public entity providing rail transportation owns the property, concession areas, to the extent that such public entity exercises control over the selection, design, construction, or alteration of the property, but this term does not include flag stops (i.e., stations which are not regularly scheduled stops but at which trains will stop to board or detrain passengers only on signal or advance notice).

Used vehicle   means a vehicle with prior use.

Vanpool   means a voluntary commuter ridesharing arrangement, using vans with a seating capacity greater than 7 persons (including the driver) or buses, which provides transportation to a group of individuals traveling directly from their homes to their regular places of work within the same geographical area, and in which the commuter/driver does not receive compensation beyond reimbursement for his or her costs of providing the service.

Vehicle,   as the term is applied to private entities, does not include a rail passenger car, railroad locomotive, railroad freight car, or railroad caboose, or other rail rolling stock described in section 242 of title III of the Act.

Wheelchair   means a mobility aid belonging to any class of three- or more-wheeled devices, usable indoors, designed or modified for and used by individuals with mobility impairments, whether operated manually or powered.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 58 FR 63101, Nov. 30, 1993; 61 FR 25415, May 21, 1996; 63 FR 51690, Sept. 28, 1998; 76 FR 57935, Sept. 19, 2011; 79 FR 21405, Apr. 16, 2014; 80 FR 13260, Mar. 13, 2015]

§ 37.5 Nondiscrimination.

(a) No entity shall discriminate against an individual with a disability in connection with the provision of transportation service.

(b) Notwithstanding the provision of any special transportation service to individuals with disabilities, an entity shall not, on the basis of disability, deny to any individual with a disability the opportunity to use the entity's transportation service for the general public, if the individual is capable of using that service.

(c) An entity shall not require an individual with a disability to use designated priority seats, if the individual does not choose to use these seats.

(d) An entity shall not impose special charges, not authorized by this part, on individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, for providing services required by this part or otherwise necessary to accommodate them.

(e) An entity shall not require that an individual with disabilities be accompanied by an attendant.

(f) Private entities that are primarily engaged in the business of transporting people and whose operations affect commerce shall not discriminate against any individual on the basis of disability in the full and equal enjoyment of specified transportation services. This obligation includes, with respect to the provision of transportation services, compliance with the requirements of the rules of the Department of Justice concerning eligibility criteria, making reasonable modifications, providing auxiliary aids and services, and removing barriers (28 CFR 36.301-36.306).

(g) An entity shall not refuse to serve an individual with a disability or require anything contrary to this part because its insurance company conditions coverage or rates on the absence of individuals with disabilities or requirements contrary to this part.

(h) It is not discrimination under this part for an entity to refuse to provide service to an individual with disabilities because that individual engages in violent, seriously disruptive, or illegal conduct, or represents a direct threat to the health or safety of others. However, an entity shall not refuse to provide service to an individual with disabilities solely because the individual's disability results in appearance or involuntary behavior that may offend, annoy, or inconvenience employees of the entity or other persons.

(i) Public and private entity distinctions. — (1) Private entity-private transport.  Private entities that are primarily engaged in the business of transporting people and whose operations affect commerce shall not discriminate against any individual on the basis of disability in the full and equal enjoyment of specified transportation services. This obligation includes, with respect to the provision of transportation services, compliance with the requirements of the rules of the Department of Justice concerning eligibility criteria, making reasonable modifications, providing auxiliary aids and services, and removing barriers (28 CFR 36.301-36.306).

(2) Private entity-public transport.  Private entities that provide specified public transportation shall make reasonable modifications in policies, practices, or procedures, when the modifications are necessary to afford goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations to individuals with disabilities, unless the entity can demonstrate that making the modifications would fundamentally alter the nature of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations.

(3) Public entity-public transport.  Public entities that provide designated public transportation shall make reasonable modifications in policies, practices, or procedures when the modifications are necessary to avoid discrimination on the basis of disability or to provide program accessibility to their services, subject to the limitations of § 37.169(c)(1)-(3). This requirement applies to the means public entities use to meet their obligations under all provisions of this part.

(4) In choosing among alternatives for meeting nondiscrimination and accessibility requirements with respect to new, altered, or existing facilities, or designated or specified transportation services, public and private entities shall give priority to those methods that offer services, programs, and activities to qualified individuals with disabilities in the most integrated setting appropriate to the needs of individuals with disabilities.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 80 FR 13260, Mar. 13, 2015]

§ 37.7 Standards for accessible vehicles.

(a) For purposes of this part, a vehicle shall be considered to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities if it meets the requirements of this part and the standards set forth in part 38 of this title.

(b) (1) For purposes of implementing the equivalent facilitation provision in § 38.2 of this subtitle, the following parties may submit to the Administrator of the applicable operating administration a request for a determination of equivalent facilitation:

(i) A public or private entity that provides transportation services and is subject to the provisions of subpart D or subpart E this part; or

(ii) The manufacturer of a vehicle or a vehicle component or subsystem to be used by such entity to comply with this part.

(2) The requesting party shall provide the following information with its request:

(i) Entity name, address, contact person and telephone;

(ii) Specific provision of part 38 of this title concerning which the entity is seeking a determination of equivalent facilitation.

(iii) [Reserved]

(iv) Alternative method of compliance, with demonstration of how the alternative meets or exceeds the level of accessibility or usability of the vehicle provided in part 38 of this subtitle; and

(v) Documentation of the public participation used in developing an alternative method of compliance.

(3) In the case of a request by a public entity that provides transportation services subject to the provisions of subpart D of this part, the required public participation shall include the following:

(i) The entity shall contact individuals with disabilities and groups representing them in the community. Consultation with these individuals and groups shall take place at all stages of the development of the request for equivalent facilitation. All documents and other information concerning the request shall be available, upon request, to members of the public.

(ii) The entity shall make its proposed request available for public comment before the request is made final or transmitted to DOT. In making the request available for public review, the entity shall ensure that it is available, upon request, in accessible formats.

(iii) The entity shall sponsor at least one public hearing on the request and shall provide adequate notice of the hearing, including advertisement in appropriate media, such as newspapers of general and special interest circulation and radio announcements.

(4) In the case of a request by a private entity that provides transportation services subject to the provisions of subpart E of this part or a manufacturer, the private entity or manufacturer shall consult, in person, in writing, or by other appropriate means, with representatives of national and local organizations representing people with those disabilities who would be affected by the request.

(5) A determination of compliance will be made by the Administrator of the concerned operating administration on a case-by-case basis, with the concurrence of the Assistant Secretary for Policy and International Affairs.

(6) Determinations of equivalent facilitation are made only with respect to vehicles or vehicle components used in the provision of transportation services covered by subpart D or subpart E of this part, and pertain only to the specific situation concerning which the determination is made. Entities shall not cite these determinations as indicating that a product or method constitute equivalent facilitations in situations other than those to which the determinations specifically pertain. Entities shall not claim that a determination of equivalent facilitation indicates approval or endorsement of any product or method by the Federal government, the Department of Transportation, or any of its operating administrations.

(c) Over-the-road buses acquired by public entities (or by a contractor to a public entity as provided in § 37.23 of this part) shall comply with § 38.23 and subpart G of part 38 of this title.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 58 FR 63101, Nov. 30, 1993; 61 FR 25416, May 21, 1996]

§ 37.9 Standards for accessible transportation facilities.

(a) For purposes of this part, a transportation facility shall be considered to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities if it meets the requirements of this part and the requirements set forth in Appendices B and D to 36 CFR part 1191, which apply to buildings and facilities covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act, as modified by Appendix A to this part.

(b) Facility alterations begun before January 26, 1992, in a good faith effort to make a facility accessible to individuals with disabilities may be used to meet the key station requirements set forth in §§ 37.47 and 37.51 of this part, even if these alterations are not consistent with the requirements set forth in Appendices B and D to 36 CFR part 1191 and Appendix A to this part, if the modifications complied with the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS) or ANSI A117.1(1980) (American National Standards Specification for Making Buildings and Facilities Accessible to and Usable by the Physically Handicapped). This paragraph applies only to alterations of individual elements and spaces and only to the extent that provisions covering those elements or spaces are contained in UFAS or ANSI A117.1, as applicable.

(c) (1) New construction or alterations of buildings or facilities on which construction has begun, or all approvals for final design have been received, before November 29, 2006, are not required to be consistent with the requirements set forth in Appendices B and D to 36 CFR part 1191 and Appendix A to this part, if the construction or alterations comply with the former Appendix A to this part, as codified in the October 1, 2006, edition of the Code of Federal Regulations.

(2) Existing buildings and facilities that are not altered after November 29, 2006, and which comply with the former Appendix A to this part, are not required to be retrofitted to comply with the requirements set forth in Appendices B and D to 36 CFR part 1191 and Appendix A to this part.

(d) (1) For purposes of implementing the equivalent facilitation provision in ADA Chapter 1, Section 103, of Appendix B to 36 CFR part 1191, the following parties may submit to the Administrator of the applicable operating administration a request for a determination of equivalent facilitation:

(i) (A) A public or private entity that provides transportation facilities subject to the provisions of subpart C of this part, or other appropriate party with the concurrence of the Administrator.

(B) With respect to airport facilities, an entity that is an airport operator subject to the requirements of 49 CFR part 27 or regulations implementing the Americans with Disabilities Act, an air carrier subject to the requirements of 14 CFR part 382, or other appropriate party with the concurrence of the Administrator.

(ii) The manufacturer of a product or accessibility feature to be used in a transportation facility or facilities.

(2) The requesting party shall provide the following information with its request:

(i) Entity name, address, contact person and telephone;

(ii) Specific provision(s) of Appendices B and D to 36 CFR part 1191 or Appendix A to this part concerning which the entity is seeking a determination of equivalent facilitation.

(iii) [Reserved]

(iv) Alternative method of compliance, with demonstration of how the alternative meets or exceeds the level of accessibility or usability provided in Appendices B and D to 36 CFR part 1191 or Appendix A to this part; and

(v) Documentation of the public participation used in developing an alternative method of compliance.

(3) In the case of a request by a public entity that provides transportation facilities (including an airport operator), or a request by an air carrier with respect to airport facilities, the required public participation shall include the following:

(i) The entity shall contact individuals with disabilities and groups representing them in the community. Consultation with these individuals and groups shall take place at all stages of the development of the request for equivalent facilitation. All documents and other information concerning the request shall be available, upon request, to Department of Transportation officials and members of the public.

(ii) The entity shall make its proposed request available for public comment before the request is made final or transmitted to DOT. In making the request available for public review, the entity shall ensure that it is available, upon request, in accessible formats.

(iii) The entity shall sponsor at least one public hearing on the request and shall provide adequate notice of the hearing, including advertisement in appropriate media, such as newspapers of general and special interest circulation and radio announcements.

(4) In the case of a request by a manufacturer or a private entity other than an air carrier, the manufacturer or private entity shall consult, in person, in writing, or by other appropriate means, with representatives of national and local organizations representing people with those disabilities who would be affected by the request.

(5) A determination of compliance will be made by the Administrator of the concerned operating administration on a case-by-case basis, with the concurrence of the Assistant Secretary for Transportation Policy.

(6) (i) Determinations of equivalent facilitation are made only with respect to transportation facilities, and pertain only to the specific situation concerning which the determination is made. Provided, however, that with respect to a product or accessibility feature that the Administrator determines can provide an equivalent facilitation in a class of situations, the Administrator may make an equivalent facilitation determination applying to that class of situations.

(ii) Entities shall not cite these determinations as indicating that a product or method constitutes equivalent facilitation in situations, or classes of situations, other than those to which the determinations specifically pertain.

(iii) Entities shall not claim that a determination of equivalent facilitation indicates approval or endorsement of any product or method by the Federal government, the Department of Transportation, or any of its operating administrations.

[71 FR 63265, Oct. 30, 2006]

§ 37.11 Administrative enforcement.

(a) Recipients of Federal financial assistance from the Department of Transportation are subject to administrative enforcement of the requirements of this part under the provisions of 49 CFR part 27, subpart C.

(b) Public entities, whether or not they receive Federal financial assistance, also are subject to enforcement action as provided by the Department of Justice.

(c) Private entities, whether or not they receive Federal financial assistance, are also subject to enforcement action as provided in the regulations of the Department of Justice implementing title III of the ADA (28 CFR part 36).

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 61 FR 25416, May 21, 1996]

§ 37.13 Effective date for certain vehicle specifications.

(a) The vehicle lift specifications identified in §§ 38.23(b)(6), 38.83(b)(6), 38.95(b)(6), and 38.125(b)(6) of this title apply to solicitations for vehicles under this part after January 25, 1992.

(b) The vehicle door height requirements for vehicles over 22 feet identified in § 38.25(c) of this title apply to solicitations for vehicles under this part after January 25, 1992.

[56 FR 64215, Dec. 9, 1991]

§ 37.15 Interpretations and guidance.

The Secretary of Transportation, Office of the Secretary of Transportation, and Operating Administrations may issue written interpretations of or written guidance concerning this part. Written interpretations and guidance shall be developed through the Department's coordinating mechanism for disability matters, the Disability Law Coordinating Council. Written interpretations and guidance constitute the official position of the Department of Transportation, or any of its operating administrations, only if they are issued over the signature of the Secretary of Transportation or if they contain the following statement: “The General Counsel of the Department of Transportation has reviewed this document and approved it as consistent with the language and intent of 49 CFR parts 27, 37, 38, and/or 39, as applicable.”

[76 FR 57935, Sept. 19, 2011]

§ 37.16 [Reserved]

§ 37.17 Designation of responsible employee and adoption of complaint procedures.

(a) Designation of responsible employee.  Each public or private entity subject to this part shall designate at least one person to coordinate its efforts to comply with this part. (b) Adoption of complaint procedures.  An entity shall adopt procedures that incorporate appropriate due process standards and provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints alleging any action prohibited by this part and 49 CFR parts 27, 38 and 39. The procedures shall meet the following requirements:

(1) The process for filing a complaint, including the name, address, telephone number, and email address of the employee designated under paragraph (a) of this section, must be sufficiently advertised to the public, such as on the entity's Web site;

(2) The procedures must be accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities;

(3) The entity must promptly communicate its response to the complaint allegations, including its reasons for the response, to the complainant and must ensure that it has documented its response.

[80 FR 13261, Mar. 13, 2015]

§§ 37.18-37.19 [Reserved]

Subpart B—Applicability

§ 37.21 Applicability: General.

(a) This part applies to the following entities, whether or not they receive Federal financial assistance from the Department of Transportation:

(1) Any public entity that provides designated public transportation or intercity or commuter rail transportation;

(2) Any private entity that provides specified public transportation; and

(3) Any private entity that is not primarily engaged in the business of transporting people but operates a demand responsive or fixed route system.

(b) For entities receiving Federal financial assistance from the Department of Transportation, compliance with applicable requirements of this part is a condition of compliance with section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and of receiving financial assistance.

(c) Entities to which this part applies also may be subject to ADA regulations of the Department of Justice (28 CFR parts 35 or 36, as applicable). The provisions of this part shall be interpreted in a manner that will make them consistent with applicable Department of Justice regulations. In any case of apparent inconsistency, the provisions of this part shall prevail.

§ 37.23 Service under contract.

(a) When a public entity enters into a contractual or other arrangement (including, but not limited to, a grant, subgrant, or cooperative agreement) or relationship with a private entity to operate fixed route or demand responsive service, the public entity shall ensure that the private entity meets the requirements of this part that would apply to the public entity if the public entity itself provided the service.

(b) A private entity which purchases or leases new, used, or remanufactured vehicles, or remanufactures vehicles, for use, or in contemplation of use, in fixed route or demand responsive service under contract or other arrangement or relationship with a public entity, shall acquire accessible vehicles in all situations in which the public entity itself would be required to do so by this part.

(c) A public entity which enters into a contractual or other arrangement (including, but not limited to, a grant, subgrant, or cooperative agreement) or relationship with a private entity to provide fixed route service shall ensure that the percentage of accessible vehicles operated by the public entity in its overall fixed route or demand responsive fleet is not diminished as a result.

(d) A private entity that provides fixed route or demand responsive transportation service under contract or other arrangement (including, but not limited to, a grant, subgrant, or cooperative agreement) with another private entity shall be governed, for purposes of the transportation service involved, by the provisions of this part applicable to the other entity.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 76 FR 57935, Sept. 19, 2011]

§ 37.25 University transportation systems.

(a) Transportation services operated by private institutions of higher education are subject to the provisions of this part governing private entities not primarily engaged in the business of transporting people.

(b) Transportation systems operated by public institutions of higher education are subject to the provisions of this part governing public entities. If a public institution of higher education operates a fixed route system, the requirements of this part governing commuter bus service apply to that system.

§ 37.27 Transportation for elementary and secondary education systems.

(a) The requirements of this part do not apply to public school transportation.

(b) The requirements of this part do not apply to the transportation of school children to and from a private elementary or secondary school, and its school-related activities, if the school is providing transportation service to students with disabilities equivalent to that provided to students without disabilities. The test of equivalence is the same as that provided in § 37.105. If the school does not meet the requirement of this paragraph for exemption from the requirements of this part, it is subject to the requirements of this part for private entities not primarily engaged in transporting people.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 61 FR 25415, May 21, 1996]

§ 37.29 Private entities providing taxi service.

(a) Providers of taxi service are subject to the requirements of this part for private entities primarily engaged in the business of transporting people which provide demand responsive service.

(b) Providers of taxi service are not required to purchase or lease accessible automobiles. When a provider of taxi service purchases or leases a vehicle other than an automobile, the vehicle is required to be accessible unless the provider demonstrates equivalency as provided in § 37.105 of this part. A provider of taxi service is not required to purchase vehicles other than automobiles in order to have a number of accessible vehicles in its fleet.

(c) Private entities providing taxi service shall not discriminate against individuals with disabilities by actions including, but not limited to, refusing to provide service to individuals with disabilities who can use taxi vehicles, refusing to assist with the stowing of mobility devices, and charging higher fares or fees for carrying individuals with disabilities and their equipment than are charged to other persons.

§ 37.31 Vanpools.

Vanpool systems which are operated by public entities, or in which public entities own or purchase or lease the vehicles, are subject to the requirements of this part for demand responsive service for the general public operated by public entities. A vanpool system in this category is deemed to be providing equivalent service to individuals with disabilities if a vehicle that an individual with disabilities can use is made available to and used by a vanpool in which such an individual chooses to participate.

§ 37.33 Airport transportation systems.

(a) Transportation systems operated by public airport operators, which provide designated public transportation and connect parking lots and terminals or provide transportation among terminals, are subject to the requirements of this part for fixed route or demand responsive systems, as applicable, operated by public entities. Public airports which operate fixed route transportation systems are subject to the requirements of this part for commuter bus service operated by public entities. The provision by an airport of additional accommodations (e.g., parking spaces in a close-in lot) is not a substitute for meeting the requirements of this part.

(b) Fixed-route transportation systems operated by public airport operators between the airport and a limited number of destinations in the area it serves are subject to the provisions of this part for commuter bus systems operated by public entities.

(c) Private jitney or shuttle services that provide transportation between an airport and destinations in the area it serves in a route-deviation or other variable mode are subject to the requirements of this part for private entities primarily engaged in the business of transporting people which provide demand responsive service. They may meet equivalency requirements by such means as sharing or pooling accessible vehicles among operators, in a way that ensures the provision of equivalent service.

§ 37.35 Supplemental service for other transportation modes.

(a) Transportation service provided by bus or other vehicle by an intercity commuter or rail operator, as an extension of or supplement to its rail service, and which connects an intercity rail station and limited other points, is subject to the requirements of this part for fixed route commuter bus service operated by a public entity.

(b) Dedicated bus service to commuter rail systems, with through ticketing arrangements and which is available only to users of the commuter rail system, is subject to the requirements of this part for fixed route commuter bus service operated by a public entity.

§ 37.37 Other applications.

(a) A private entity does not become subject to the requirements of this part for public entities, because it receives an operating subsidy from, is regulated by, or is granted a franchise or permit to operate by a public entity.

(b) Shuttle systems and other transportation services operated by privately-owned hotels, car rental agencies, historical or theme parks, and other public accommodations are subject to the requirements of this part for private entities not primarily engaged in the business of transporting people. Either the requirements for demand responsive or fixed route service may apply, depending upon the characteristics of each individual system of transportation.

(c) Conveyances used by members of the public primarily for recreational purposes rather than for transportation (e.g., amusement park rides, ski lifts, or historic rail cars or trolleys operated in museum settings) are not subject to the requirements of this part. Such conveyances are subject to Department of Justice regulations implementing title II or title III of the ADA (28 CFR part 35 or 36), as applicable.

(d) Transportation services provided by an employer solely for its own employees are not subject to the requirements of this part. Such services are subject to the regulations of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission under title I of the ADA (29 CFR part 1630) and, with respect to public entities, the regulations of the Department of Justice under title II of the ADA (28 CFR part 35).

(e) Transportation systems operated by private clubs or establishments exempted from coverage under title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000-a(e)) or religious organizations or entities controlled by religious organizations are not subject to the requirements of this part.

(f) If a parent private company is not primarily engaged in the business of transporting people, or is not a place of public accommodation, but a subsidiary company or an operationally distinct segment of the company is primarily engaged in the business of transporting people, the transportation service provided by the subsidiary or segment is subject to the requirements of this part for private entities primarily engaged in the business of transporting people.

(g) High-speed rail systems operated by public entities are subject to the requirements of this part governing intercity rail systems.

(h) Private rail systems providing fixed route or specified public transportation service are subject to the requirements of § 37.107 with respect to the acquisition of rail passenger cars. Such systems are subject to the requirements of the regulations of the Department of Justice implementing title III of the ADA (28 CFR part 36) with respect to stations and other facilities.

§ 37.39 [Reserved]

Subpart C—Transportation Facilities

§ 37.41 Construction of transportation facilities by public entities.

(a) A public entity shall construct any new facility to be used in providing designated public transportation services so that the facility is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs. This requirement also applies to the construction of a new station for use in intercity or commuter rail transportation. For purposes of this section, a facility or station is “new” if its construction begins (i.e., issuance of notice to proceed) after January 25, 1992, or, in the case of intercity or commuter rail stations, after October 7, 1991.

(b) (1) Full compliance with the requirements of this section is not required where an entity can demonstrate that it is structurally impracticable to meet the requirements. Full compliance will be considered structurally impracticable only in those rare circumstances when the unique characteristics of terrain prevent the incorporation of accessibility features.

(2) If full compliance with this section would be structurally impracticable, compliance with this section is required to the extent that it is not structurally impracticable. In that case, any portion of the facility that can be made accessible shall be made accessible to the extent that it is not structurally impracticable.

(3) If providing accessibility in conformance with this section to individuals with certain disabilities (e.g., those who use wheelchairs) would be structurally impracticable, accessibility shall nonetheless be ensured to persons with other types of disabilities (e.g., those who use crutches or who have sight, hearing, or mental impairments) in accordance with this section.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 71 FR 63266, Oct. 30, 2006]

§ 37.42 Service in an Integrated Setting to Passengers at Intercity, Commuter, and High-Speed Rail Station Platforms Constructed or Altered After February 1, 2012.

(a) In addition to meeting the requirements of sections 37.9 and 37.41, an operator of a commuter, intercity, or high-speed rail system must ensure, at stations that are approved for entry into final design or that begin construction or alteration of platforms on or after February 1, 2012, that the following performance standard is met: individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, must have access to all accessible cars available to passengers without disabilities in each train using the station.

(b) For new or altered stations serving commuter, intercity, or high-speed rail lines or systems, in which no track passing through the station and adjacent to platforms is shared with existing freight rail operations, the performance standard of paragraph (a) of this section must be met by providing level-entry boarding to all accessible cars in each train that serves the station.

(c) For new or altered stations serving commuter, intercity, or high-speed rail lines or systems, in which track passing through the station and adjacent to platforms is shared with existing freight rail operations, the railroad operator may comply with the performance standard of paragraph (a) by use of one or more of the following means:

(1) Level-entry boarding;

(2) Car-borne lifts;

(3) Bridge plates, ramps or other appropriate devices;

(4) Mini-high platforms, with multiple mini-high platforms or multiple train stops, as needed, to permit access to all accessible cars available at that station; or

(5) Station-based lifts;

(d) Before constructing or altering a platform at a station covered by paragraph (c) of this section, at which a railroad proposes to use a means other than level-entry boarding, the railroad must meet the following requirements:

(1) If the railroad operator not using level-entry boarding chooses a means of meeting the performance standard other than using car-borne lifts, it must perform a comparison of the costs (capital, operating, and life-cycle costs) of car-borne lifts and the means chosen by the railroad operator, as well as a comparison of the relative ability of each of these alternatives to provide service to individuals with disabilities in an integrated, safe, timely, and reliable manner. The railroad operator must submit a copy of this analysis to FTA or FRA at the time it submits the plan required by paragraph (d)(2) of this section.

(2) The railroad operator must submit a plan to FRA and/or FTA, describing its proposed means to meet the performance standard of paragraph (a) of this section at that station. The plan must demonstrate how boarding equipment or platforms would be deployed, maintained, and operated; and how personnel would be trained and deployed to ensure that service to individuals with disabilities is provided in an integrated, safe, timely, and reliable manner.

(3) Before proceeding with constructing or modifying a station platform covered by paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section, the railroad must obtain approval from the FTA (for commuter rail systems) or the FRA (for intercity rail systems). The agencies will evaluate the proposed plan and may approve, disapprove, or modify it. The FTA and the FRA may make this determination jointly in any situation in which both a commuter rail system and an intercity or high-speed rail system use the tracks serving the platform. FTA and FRA will respond to the railroad's plan in a timely manner, in accordance with the timetable set forth in paragraphs (d)(3)(i) through (d)(3)(iii) of this paragraph.

(i) FTA/FRA will provide an initial written response within 30 days of receiving a railroad's written proposal. This response will say either that the submission is complete or that additional information is needed.

(ii) Once a complete package, including any requested additional information, is received, as acknowledged by FRA/FTA in writing, FRA/FTA will provide a substantive response accepting, rejecting, or modifying the proposal within 120 days.

(iii) If FTA/FRA needs additional time to consider the railroad's proposal, FRA/FTA will provide a written communication to the railroad setting forth the reasons for the delay and an estimate of the additional time (not to exceed an additional 60 days) that FRA/FTA expect to take to finalize a substantive response to the proposal.

(iv) In reviewing the plan, FRA and FTA will consider factors including, but not limited to, how the proposal maximizes accessibility to individuals with disabilities, any obstacles to the use of a method that could provide better service to individuals with disabilities, the safety and reliability of the approach and related technology proposed to be used, the suitability of the means proposed to the station and line and/or system on which it would be used, and the adequacy of equipment and maintenance and staff training and deployment.

(e) In any situation using a combination of high and low platforms, a commuter or intercity rail operator shall not employ a solution that has the effect of channeling passengers into a narrow space between the face of the higher-level platform and the edge of the lower platform.

(1) Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2) of this paragraph, any obstructions on a platform (mini-high platforms, stairwells, elevator shafts, seats etc.) shall be set at least six feet back from the edge of a platform.

(2) If the six-foot clearance is not feasible (e.g., where such a clearance would create an insurmountable gap on a mini-high platform or where the physical structure of an existing station does not allow such clearance), barriers must be used to prevent the flow of pedestrian traffic through these narrower areas.

(f) For purposes of this part, level-entry boarding means a boarding platform design in which the horizontal gap between a car at rest and the platform is no more than 10 inches on tangent track and 13 inches on curves and the vertical height of the car floor is no more than 5.5 inches above the boarding platform. Where the horizontal gap is more than 3 inches and/or the vertical gap is more than 5⁄8 inch, measured when the vehicle is at rest, the horizontal and vertical gaps between the car floor and the boarding platform must be mitigated by a bridge plate, ramp, or other appropriate device consistent with 49 CFR 38.95(c) and 38.125(c).

[76 FR 57935, Sept. 19, 2011]

§ 37.43 Alteration of transportation facilities by public entities.

(a) (1) When a public entity alters an existing facility or a part of an existing facility used in providing designated public transportation services in a way that affects or could affect the usability of the facility or part of the facility, the entity shall make the alterations (or ensure that the alterations are made) in such a manner, to the maximum extent feasible, that the altered portions of the facility are readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, upon the completion of such alterations.

(2) When a public entity undertakes an alteration that affects or could affect the usability of or access to an area of a facility containing a primary function, the entity shall make the alteration in such a manner that, to the maximum extent feasible, the path of travel to the altered area and the bathrooms, telephones, and drinking fountains serving the altered area are readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, upon completion of the alterations. Provided, that alterations to the path of travel, drinking fountains, telephones and bathrooms are not required to be made readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, if the cost and scope of doing so would be disproportionate.

(3) The requirements of this paragraph also apply to the alteration of existing intercity or commuter rail stations by the responsible person for, owner of, or person in control of the station.

(4) The requirements of this section apply to any alteration which begins (i.e., issuance of notice to proceed or work order, as applicable) after January 25, 1992, or, in the case of intercity and commuter rail stations, after October 7, 1991.

(b) As used in this section, the phrase to the maximum extent feasible applies to the occasional case where the nature of an existing facility makes it impossible to comply fully with applicable accessibility standards through a planned alteration. In these circumstances, the entity shall provide the maximum physical accessibility feasible. Any altered features of the facility or portion of the facility that can be made accessible shall be made accessible. If providing accessibility to certain individuals with disabilities (e.g., those who use wheelchairs) would not be feasible, the facility shall be made accessible to individuals with other types of disabilities (e.g., those who use crutches, those who have impaired vision or hearing, or those who have other impairments).

(c) As used in this section, a primary function is a major activity for which the facility is intended. Areas of transportation facilities that involve primary functions include, but are not necessarily limited to, ticket purchase and collection areas, passenger waiting areas, train or bus platforms, baggage checking and return areas and employment areas (except those involving non-occupiable spaces accessed only by ladders, catwalks, crawl spaces, very narrow passageways, or freight (non-passenger) elevators which are frequented only by repair personnel).

(d) As used in this section, a “path of travel” includes a continuous, unobstructed way of pedestrian passage by means of which the altered area may be approached, entered, and exited, and which connects the altered area with an exterior approach (including sidewalks, parking areas, and streets), an entrance to the facility, and other parts of the facility. The term also includes the restrooms, telephones, and drinking fountains serving the altered area. An accessible path of travel may include walks and sidewalks, curb ramps and other interior or exterior pedestrian ramps, clear floor paths through corridors, waiting areas, concourses, and other improved areas, parking access aisles, elevators and lifts, bridges, tunnels, or other passageways between platforms, or a combination of these and other elements.

(e) (1) Alterations made to provide an accessible path of travel to the altered area will be deemed disproportionate to the overall alteration when the cost exceeds 20 percent of the cost of the alteration to the primary function area (without regard to the costs of accessibility modifications).

(2) Costs that may be counted as expenditures required to provide an accessible path of travel include:

(i) Costs associated with providing an accessible entrance and an accessible route to the altered area (e.g., widening doorways and installing ramps);

(ii) Costs associated with making restrooms accessible (e.g., grab bars, enlarged toilet stalls, accessible faucet controls);

(iii) Costs associated with providing accessible telephones (e.g., relocation of phones to an accessible height, installation of amplification devices or TDDs);

(iv) Costs associated with relocating an inaccessible drinking fountain.

(f) (1) When the cost of alterations necessary to make a path of travel to the altered area fully accessible is disproportionate to the cost of the overall alteration, then such areas shall be made accessible to the maximum extent without resulting in disproportionate costs;

(2) In this situation, the public entity should give priority to accessible elements that will provide the greatest access, in the following order:

(i) An accessible entrance;

(ii) An accessible route to the altered area;

(iii) At least one accessible restroom for each sex or a single unisex restroom (where there are one or more restrooms);

(iv) Accessible telephones;

(v) Accessible drinking fountains;

(vi) When possible, other accessible elements (e.g., parking, storage, alarms).

(g) If a public entity performs a series of small alterations to the area served by a single path of travel rather than making the alterations as part of a single undertaking, it shall nonetheless be responsible for providing an accessible path of travel.

(h) (1) If an area containing a primary function has been altered without providing an accessible path of travel to that area, and subsequent alterations of that area, or a different area on the same path of travel, are undertaken within three years of the original alteration, the total cost of alteration to the primary function areas on that path of travel during the preceding three year period shall be considered in determining whether the cost of making that path of travel is disproportionate;

(2) For the first three years after January 26, 1992, only alterations undertaken between that date and the date of the alteration at issue shall be considered in determining if the cost of providing accessible features is disproportionate to the overall cost of the alteration.

(3) Only alterations undertaken after January 26, 1992, shall be considered in determining if the cost of providing an accessible path of travel is disproportionate to the overall cost of the alteration.

§ 37.45 Construction and alteration of transportation facilities by private entities.

In constructing and altering transit facilities, private entities shall comply with the regulations of the Department of Justice implementing Title III of the ADA (28 CFR part 36).

§ 37.47 Key stations in light and rapid rail systems.

(a) Each public entity that provides designated public transportation by means of a light or rapid rail system shall make key stations on its system readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs. This requirement is separate from and in addition to requirements set forth in § 37.43 of this part.

(b) Each public entity shall determine which stations on its system are key stations. The entity shall identify key stations, using the planning and public participation process set forth in paragraph (d) of this section, and taking into consideration the following criteria:

(1) Stations where passenger boardings exceed average station passenger boardings on the rail system by at least fifteen percent, unless such a station is close to another accessible station;

(2) Transfer stations on a rail line or between rail lines;

(3) Major interchange points with other transportation modes, including stations connecting with major parking facilities, bus terminals, intercity or commuter rail stations, passenger vessel terminals, or airports;

(4) End stations, unless an end station is close to another accessible station; and

(5) Stations serving major activity centers, such as employment or government centers, institutions of higher education, hospitals or other major health care facilities, or other facilities that are major trip generators for individuals with disabilities.

(c) (1) Unless an entity receives an extension under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, the public entity shall achieve accessibility of key stations as soon as possible, but in no case later than July 26, 1994.

(2) The FTA Administrator may grant an extension of this completion date for key station accessibility for a period up to July 26, 2020, provided that two-thirds of key stations are made accessible by July 26, 2010. Extensions may be granted as provided in paragraph (e) of this section.

(d) The public entity shall develop a plan for compliance for this section. The plan shall be submitted to the appropriate FTA regional office by July 26, 1992. (See appendix B to this part for list.)

(1) The public entity shall consult with individuals with disabilities affected by the plan. The public entity also shall hold at least one public hearing on the plan and solicit comments on it. The plan submitted to FTA shall document this public participation, including summaries of the consultation with individuals with disabilities and the comments received at the hearing and during the comment period. The plan also shall summarize the public entity's responses to the comments and consultation.

(2) The plan shall establish milestones for the achievement of required accessibility of key stations, consistent with the requirements of this section.

(e) A public entity wishing to apply for an extension of the July 26, 1993, deadline for key station accessibility shall include a request for an extension with its plan submitted to FTA under paragraph (d) of this section. Extensions may be granted only with respect to key stations which need extraordinarily expensive structural changes to, or replacement of, existing facilities (e.g., installations of elevators, raising the entire passenger platform, or alterations of similar magnitude and cost). Requests for extensions shall provide for completion of key station accessibility within the time limits set forth in paragraph (c) of this section. The FTA Administrator may approve, approve with conditions, modify, or disapprove any request for an extension.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 58 FR 63102, Nov. 30, 1993; 79 FR 21405, Apr. 16, 2014]

§ 37.49 Designation of responsible person(s) for intercity and commuter rail stations.

(a) The responsible person(s) designated in accordance with this section shall bear the legal and financial responsibility for making a key station accessible in the same proportion as determined under this section.

(b) In the case of a station more than fifty percent of which is owned by a public entity, the public entity is the responsible party.

(c) In the case of a station more than fifty percent of which is owned by a private entity the persons providing commuter or intercity rail service to the station are the responsible parties, in a proportion equal to the percentage of all passenger boardings at the station attributable to the service of each, over the entire period during which the station is made accessible.

(d) In the case of a station of which no entity owns more than fifty percent, the owners of the station (other than private entity owners) and persons providing intercity or commuter rail service to the station are the responsible persons.

(1) Half the responsibility for the station shall be assumed by the owner(s) of the station. The owners shall share this responsibility in proportion to their ownership interest in the station, over the period during which the station is made accessible.

(2) The person(s) providing commuter or intercity rail service to the station shall assume the other half of the responsibility. These persons shall share this responsibility. These persons shall share this responsibility for the station in a proportion equal to the percentage of all passenger boardings at the station attributable to the service of each, over the period during which the station is made accessible.

(e) Persons who must share responsibility for station accessibility under paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section may, by agreement, allocate their responsibility in a manner different from that provided in this section.

§ 37.51 Key stations in commuter rail systems.

(a) The responsible person(s) shall make key stations on its system readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs. This requirement is separate from and in addition to requirements set forth in § 37.43 of this part.

(b) Each commuter authority shall determine which stations on its system are key stations. The commuter authority shall identify key stations, using the planning and public participation process set forth in paragraph (d) of this section, and taking into consideration the following criteria:

(1) Stations where passenger boardings exceed average station passenger boardings on the rail system by at least fifteen percent, unless such a station is close to another accessible station;

(2) Transfer stations on a rail line or between rail lines;

(3) Major interchange points with other transportation modes, including stations connecting with major parking facilities, bus terminals, intercity or commuter rail stations, passenger vessel terminals, or airports;

(4) End stations, unless an end station is close to another accessible station; and

(5) Stations serving major activity centers, such as employment or government centers, institutions of higher education, hospitals or other major health care facilities, or other facilities that are major trip generators for individuals with disabilities.

(c) (1) Except as provided in this paragraph, the responsible person(s) shall achieve accessibility of key stations as soon as possible, but in no case later than July 26, 1994.

(2) The FTA Administrator may grant an extension of this deadline for key station accessibility for a period up to July 26, 2010. Extensions may be granted as provided in paragraph (e) of this section.

(d) The commuter authority and responsible person(s) for stations involved shall develop a plan for compliance for this section. This plan shall be completed and submitted to FTA by July 26, 1992.

(1) The commuter authority and responsible person(s) shall consult with individuals with disabilities affected by the plan. The commuter authority and responsible person(s) also shall hold at least one public hearing on the plan and solicit comments on it. The plan shall document this public participation, including summaries of the consultation with individuals with disabilities and the comments received at the hearing and during the comment period. The plan also shall summarize the responsible person(s) responses to the comments and consultation.

(2) The plan shall establish milestones for the achievement of required accessibility of key stations, consistent with the requirements of this section.

(3) The commuter authority and responsible person(s) of each key station identified in the plan shall, by mutual agreement, designate a project manager for the purpose of undertaking the work of making the key station accessible.

(e) Any commuter authority and/or responsible person(s) wishing to apply for an extension of the July 26, 1993, deadline for key station accessibility shall include a request for extension with its plan submitted to under paragraph (d) of this section. Extensions may be granted only in a case where raising the entire passenger platform is the only means available of attaining accessibility or where other extraordinarily expensive structural changes (e.g., installations of elevators, or alterations of magnitude and cost similar to installing an elevator or raising the entire passenger platform) are necessary to attain accessibility. Requests for extensions shall provide for completion of key station accessibility within the time limits set forth in paragraph (c) of this section. The FTA Administrator may approve, approve with conditions, modify, or disapprove any request for an extension.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 58 FR 63102, Nov. 30, 1993; 79 FR 21405, Apr. 16, 2014]

§ 37.53 Exception for New York and Philadelphia.

(a) The following agreements entered into in New York, New York, and Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, contain lists of key stations for the public entities that are a party to those agreements for those service lines identified in the agreements. The identification of key stations under these agreements is deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this Subpart.

(1) Settlement Agreement by and among Eastern Paralyzed Veterans Association, Inc., James J. Peters, Terrance Moakley, and Denise Figueroa, individually and as representatives of the class of all persons similarly situated (collectively, “the EPVA class representatives”); and Metropolitan Transportation Authority, New York City Transit Authority, and Manhattan and Bronx Surface Transit Operating Authority (October 4, 1984).

(2) Settlement Agreement by and between Eastern Paralyzed Veterans Association of Pennsylvania, Inc., and James J. Peters, individually; and Dudley R. Sykes, as Commissioner of the Philadelphia Department of Public Property, and his successors in office and the City of Philadelphia (collectively “the City”) and Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (June 28, 1989).

(b) To comply with §§ 37.47 (b) and (d) or 37.51 (b) and (d) of this part, the entities named in the agreements are required to use their public participation and planning processes only to develop and submit to the FTA Administrator plans for timely completion of key station accessibilty, as provided in this subpart.

(c) In making accessible the key stations identified under the agreements cited in this section, the entities named in the agreements are subject to the requirements of § 37.9 of this part.

§ 37.55 Intercity rail station accessibility.

All intercity rail stations shall be made readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, as soon as practicable, but in no event later than July 26, 2010. This requirement is separate from and in addition to requirements set forth in § 37.43 of this part.

§ 37.57 Required cooperation.

An owner or person in control of an intercity or commuter rail station shall provide reasonable cooperation to the responsible person(s) for that station with respect to the efforts of the responsible person to comply with the requirements of this subpart.

§ 37.59 Differences in accessibility completion dates.

Where different completion dates for accessible stations are established under this part for a station or portions of a station (e.g., extensions of different periods of time for a station which serves both rapid and commuter rail systems), accessibility to the following elements of the station shall be achieved by the earlier of the completion dates involved:

(a) Common elements of the station;

(b) Portions of the facility directly serving the rail system with the earlier completion date; and

(c) An accessible path from common elements of the station to portions of the facility directly serving the rail system with the earlier completion date.

§ 37.61 Public transportation programs and activities in existing facilities.

(a) A public entity shall operate a designated public transportation program or activity conducted in an existing facility so that, when viewed in its entirety, the program or activity is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities.

(b) This section does not require a public entity to make structural changes to existing facilities in order to make the facilities accessible by individuals who use wheelchairs, unless and to the extent required by § 37.43 (with respect to alterations) or §§ 37.47 or 37.51 of this part (with respect to key stations). Entities shall comply with other applicable accessibility requirements for such facilities.

(c) Public entities, with respect to facilities that, as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, are not required to be made accessible to individuals who use wheelchairs, are not required to provide to such individuals services made available to the general public at such facilities when the individuals could not utilize or benefit from the services.

§§ 37.63-37.69 [Reserved]

Subpart D—Acquisition of Accessible Vehicles By Public Entities

§ 37.71 Purchase or lease of new non-rail vehicles by public entities operating fixed route systems.

(a) Each public entity operating a fixed route system making a solicitation after August 25, 1990, to purchase or lease a new bus or other new vehicle for use on the system, shall ensure that the vehicle is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 76 FR 57936, Sept. 19, 2011]

§ 37.73 Purchase or lease of used non-rail vehicles by public entities operating fixed route systems.

(a) Except as provided elsewhere in this section, each public entity operating a fixed route system purchasing or leasing, after August 25, 1990, a used bus or other used vehicle for use on the system, shall ensure that the vehicle is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

(b) A public entity may purchase or lease a used vehicle for use on its fixed route system that is not readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities if, after making demonstrated good faith efforts to obtain an accessible vehicle, it is unable to do so.

(c) Good faith efforts shall include at least the following steps:

(1) An initial solicitation for used vehicles specifying that all used vehicles are to be lift-equipped and otherwise accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, or, if an initial solicitation is not used, a documented communication so stating;

(2) A nationwide search for accessible vehicles, involving specific inquiries to used vehicle dealers and other transit providers; and

(3) Advertising in trade publications and contacting trade associations.

(d) Each public entity purchasing or leasing used vehicles that are not readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities shall retain documentation of the specific good faith efforts it made for three years from the date the vehicles were purchased. These records shall be made available, on request, to the FTA Administrator and the public.

§ 37.75 Remanufacture of non-rail vehicles and purchase or lease of remanufactured non-rail vehicles by public entities operating fixed route systems.

(a) This section applies to any public entity operating a fixed route system which takes one of the following actions:

(1) After August 25, 1990, remanufactures a bus or other vehicle so as to extend its useful life for five years or more or makes a solicitation for such remanufacturing; or

(2) Purchases or leases a bus or other vehicle which has been remanufactured so as to extend its useful life for five years or more, where the purchase or lease occurs after August 25, 1990, and during the period in which the useful life of the vehicle is extended.

(b) Vehicles acquired through the actions listed in paragraph (a) of this section shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

(c) For purposes of this section, it shall be considered feasible to remanufacture a bus or other motor vehicle so as to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, unless an engineering analysis demonstrates that including accessibility features required by this part would have a significant adverse effect on the structural integrity of the vehicle.

(d) If a public entity operates a fixed route system, any segment of which is included on the National Register of Historic Places, and if making a vehicle of historic character used solely on such segment readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities would significantly alter the historic character of such vehicle, the public entity has only to make (or purchase or lease a remanufactured vehicle with) those modifications to make the vehicle accessible which do not alter the historic character of such vehicle, in consultation with the National Register of Historic Places.

(e) A public entity operating a fixed route system as described in paragraph (d) of this section may apply in writing to the FTA Administrator for a determination of the historic character of the vehicle. The FTA Administrator shall refer such requests to the National Register of Historic Places, and shall rely on its advice in making determinations of the historic character of the vehicle.

§ 37.77 Purchase or lease of new non-rail vehicles by public entities operating a demand responsive system for the general public.

(a) Except as provided in this section, a public entity operating a demand responsive system for the general public making a solicitation after August 25, 1990, to purchase or lease a new bus or other new vehicle for use on the system, shall ensure that the vehicle is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

(b) If the system, when viewed in its entirety, provides a level of service to individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, equivalent to the level of service it provides to individuals without disabilities, it may purchase new vehicles that are not readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities.

(c) For purposes of this section, a demand responsive system, when viewed in its entirety, shall be deemed to provide equivalent service if the service available to individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, is provided in the most integrated setting appropriate to the needs of the individual and is equivalent to the service provided other individuals with respect to the following service characteristics:

(1) Response time;

(2) Fares;

(3) Geographic area of service;

(4) Hours and days of service;

(5) Restrictions or priorities based on trip purpose;

(6) Availability of information and reservations capability; and

(7) Any constraints on capacity or service availability.

(d) A public entity receiving FTA funds under 49 U.S.C. 5311 or a public entity in a small urbanized area which receives FTA funds under 49 U.S.C. 5307 from a state administering agency rather than directly from FTA, which determines that its service to individuals with disabilities is equivalent to that provided other persons shall, before any procurement of an inaccessible vehicle, file with the appropriate state program office a certificate that it provides equivalent service meeting the standards of paragraph (c) of this section. Public entities operating demand responsive service receiving funds under any other section of the FT Act shall file the certificate with the appropriate FTA regional office. A public entity which does not receive FTA funds shall make such a certificate and retain it in its files, subject to inspection on request of FTA. All certificates under this paragraph may be made and filed in connection with a particular procurement or in advance of a procurement; however, no certificate shall be valid for more than one year. A copy of the required certificate is found in appendix C to this part.

(e) The waiver mechanism set forth in § 37.71(b)-(g) (unavailability of lifts) of this subpart shall also be available to public entities operating a demand responsive system for the general public.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 79 FR 21406, Apr. 16, 2014]

§ 37.79 Purchase or lease of new rail vehicles by public entities operating rapid or light rail systems.

Each public entity operating a rapid or light rail system making a solicitation after August 25, 1990, to purchase or lease a new rapid or light rail vehicle for use on the system shall ensure that the vehicle is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

§ 37.81 Purchase or lease of used rail vehicles by public entities operating rapid or light rail systems.

(a) Except as provided elsewhere in this section, each public entity operating a rapid or light rail system which, after August 25, 1990, purchases or leases a used rapid or light rail vehicle for use on the system shall ensure that the vehicle is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

(b) A public entity may purchase or lease a used rapid or light rail vehicle for use on its rapid or light rail system that is not readily accessible to and usable by individuals if, after making demonstrated good faith efforts to obtain an accessible vehicle, it is unable to do so.

(c) Good faith efforts shall include at least the following steps:

(1) The initial solicitation for used vehicles made by the public entity specifying that all used vehicles were to be accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, or, if a solicitation is not used, a documented communication so stating;

(2) A nationwide search for accessible vehicles, involving specific inquiries to manufacturers and other transit providers; and

(3) Advertising in trade publications and contacting trade associations.

(d) Each public entity purchasing or leasing used rapid or light rail vehicles that are not readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities shall retain documentation of the specific good faith efforts it made for three years from the date the vehicles were purchased. These records shall be made available, on request, to the FTA Administrator and the public.

§ 37.83 Remanufacture of rail vehicles and purchase or lease of remanufactured rail vehicles by public entities operating rapid or light rail systems.

(a) This section applies to any public entity operating a rapid or light rail system which takes one of the following actions:

(1) After August 25, 1990, remanufactures a light or rapid rail vehicle so as to extend its useful life for five years or more or makes a solicitation for such remanufacturing;

(2) Purchases or leases a light or rapid rail vehicle which has been remanufactured so as to extend its useful life for five years or more, where the purchase or lease occurs after August 25, 1990, and during the period in which the useful life of the vehicle is extended.

(b) Vehicles acquired through the actions listed in paragraph (a) of this section shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

(c) For purposes of this section, it shall be considered feasible to remanufacture a rapid or light rail vehicle so as to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, unless an engineering analysis demonstrates that doing so would have a significant adverse effect on the structural integrity of the vehicle.

(d) If a public entity operates a rapid or light rail system any segment of which is included on the National Register of Historic Places and if making a rapid or light rail vehicle of historic character used solely on such segment readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities would significantly alter the historic character of such vehicle, the public entity need only make (or purchase or lease a remanufactured vehicle with) those modifications that do not alter the historic character of such vehicle.

(e) A public entity operating a fixed route system as described in paragraph (d) of this section may apply in writing to the FTA Administrator for a determination of the historic character of the vehicle. The FTA Administrator shall refer such requests to the National Register of Historic Places and shall rely on its advice in making a determination of the historic character of the vehicle.

§ 37.85 Purchase or lease of new intercity and commuter rail cars.

Amtrak or a commuter authority making a solicitation after August 25, 1990, to purchase or lease a new intercity or commuter rail car for use on the system shall ensure that the vehicle is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

§ 37.87 Purchase or lease of used intercity and commuter rail cars.

(a) Except as provided elsewhere in this section, Amtrak or a commuter authority purchasing or leasing a used intercity or commuter rail car after August 25, 1990, shall ensure that the car is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

(b) Amtrak or a commuter authority may purchase or lease a used intercity or commuter rail car that is not readily accessible to and usable by individuals if, after making demonstrated good faith efforts to obtain an accessible vehicle, it is unable to do so.

(c) Good faith efforts shall include at least the following steps:

(1) An initial solicitation for used vehicles specifying that all used vehicles accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities;

(2) A nationwide search for accessible vehicles, involving specific inquiries to used vehicle dealers and other transit providers; and

(3) Advertising in trade publications and contacting trade associations.

(d) When Amtrak or a commuter authority leases a used intercity or commuter rail car for a period of seven days or less, Amtrak or the commuter authority may make and document good faith efforts as provided in this paragraph instead of in the ways provided in paragraph (c) of this section:

(1) By having and implementing, in its agreement with any intercity railroad or commuter authority that serves as a source of used intercity or commuter rail cars for a lease of seven days or less, a provision requiring that the lessor provide all available accessible rail cars before providing any inaccessible rail cars.

(2) By documenting that, when there is more than one source of intercity or commuter rail cars for a lease of seven days or less, the lessee has obtained all available accessible intercity or commuter rail cars from all sources before obtaining inaccessible intercity or commuter rail cars from any source.

(e) Amtrak and commuter authorities purchasing or leasing used intercity or commuter rail cars that are not readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities shall retain documentation of the specific good faith efforts that were made for three years from the date the cars were purchased. These records shall be made available, on request, to the Federal Railroad Administration or FTA Administrator, as applicable. These records shall be made available to the public, on request.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 58 FR 63102, Nov. 30, 1993]

§ 37.89 Remanufacture of intercity and commuter rail cars and purchase or lease of remanufactured intercity and commuter rail cars.

(a) This section applies to Amtrak or a commuter authority which takes one of the following actions:

(1) Remanufactures an intercity or commuter rail car so as to extend its useful life for ten years or more;

(2) Purchases or leases an intercity or commuter rail car which has been remanufactured so as to extend its useful life for ten years or more.

(b) Intercity and commuter rail cars listed in paragraph (a) of this section shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

(c) For purposes of this section, it shall be considered feasible to remanufacture an intercity or commuter rail car so as to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, unless an engineering analysis demonstrates that remanufacturing the car to be accessible would have a significant adverse effect on the structural integrity of the car.

§ 37.91 Wheelchair locations and food service on intercity rail trains.

(a) As soon as practicable, but in no event later than July 26, 1995, each person providing intercity rail service shall provide on each train a number of spaces—

(1) To park wheelchairs (to accommodate individuals who wish to remain in their wheelchairs) equal to not less than one half of the number of single level rail passenger coaches in the train; and

(2) To fold and store wheelchairs (to accommodate individuals who wish to transfer to coach seats) equal to not less than one half the number of single level rail passenger coaches in the train.

(b) As soon as practicable, but in no event later than July 26, 2000, each person providing intercity rail service shall provide on each train a number of spaces—

(1) To park wheelchairs (to accommodate individuals who wish to remain in their wheelchairs) equal to not less than the total number of single level rail passenger coaches in the train; and

(2) To fold and store wheelchairs (to accommodate individuals who wish to transfer to coach seats) equal to not less than the total number of single level rail passenger coaches in the train.

(c) In complying with paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, a person providing intercity rail service may not provide more than two spaces to park wheelchairs nor more than two spaces to fold and store wheelchairs in any one coach or food service car.

(d) Unless not practicable, a person providing intercity rail transportation shall place an accessible car adjacent to the end of a single level dining car through which an individual who uses a wheelchair may enter.

(e) On any train in which either a single level or bi-level dining car is used to provide food service, a person providing intercity rail service shall provide appropriate aids and services to ensure that equivalent food service is available to individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, and to passengers traveling with such individuals. Appropriate auxiliary aids and services include providing a hard surface on which to eat.

(f) This section does not require the provision of securement devices on intercity rail cars.

§ 37.93 One car per train rule.

(a) The definition of accessible for purposes of meeting the one car per train rule is spelled out in the applicable subpart for each transportation system type in part 38 of this title.

(b) Each person providing intercity rail service and each commuter rail authority shall ensure that, as soon as practicable, but in no event later than July 26, 1995, that each train has one car that is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

(c) Each public entity providing light or rapid rail service shall ensure that each train, consisting of two or more vehicles, includes at least one car that is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, as soon as practicable but in no case later than July 25, 1995.

§ 37.95 Ferries and other passenger vessels operated by public entities. [Reserved]

§§ 37.97-37.99 [Reserved]

Subpart E—Acquisition of Accessible Vehicles by Private Entities

§ 37.101 Purchase or lease of vehicles by private entities not primarily engaged in the business of transporting people.

(a) Application.  This section applies to all purchases or leases of vehicles by private entities which are not primarily engaged in the business of transporting people, in which a solicitation for the vehicle is made after August 25, 1990.

(b) Fixed Route System. Vehicle Capacity Over 16.  If the entity operates a fixed route system and purchases or leases a vehicle with a seating capacity of over 16 passengers (including the driver) for use on the system, it shall ensure that the vehicle is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

(c) Fixed Route System. Vehicle Capacity of 16 or Fewer.  If the entity operates a fixed route system and purchases or leases a vehicle with a seating capacity of 16 or fewer passengers (including the driver) for use on the system, it shall ensure that the vehicle is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, unless the system, when viewed in its entirety, meets the standard for equivalent service of § 37.105 of this part.

(d) Demand Responsive System, Vehicle Capacity Over 16.  If the entity operates a demand responsive system, and purchases or leases a vehicle with a seating capacity of over 16 passengers (including the driver) for use on the system, it shall ensure that the vehicle is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, unless the system, when viewed in its entirety, meets the standard for equivalent service of § 37.105 of this part.

(e) Demand Responsive System, Vehicle Capacity of 16 or Fewer.  Entities providing demand responsive transportation covered under this section are not specifically required to ensure that new vehicles with seating capacity of 16 or fewer are accessible to individuals with wheelchairs. These entities are required to ensure that their systems, when viewed in their entirety, meet the equivalent service requirements of §§ 37.171 and 37.105, regardless of whether or not the entities purchase a new vehicle.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 61 FR 25416, May 21, 1996]

§ 37.103 Purchase or lease of new non-rail vehicles by private entities primarily engaged in the business of transporting people.

(a) Application.  This section applies to all acquisitions of new vehicles by private entities which are primarily engaged in the business of transporting people and whose operations affect commerce, in which a solicitation for the vehicle is made (except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section) after August 25, 1990.

(b) Fixed route systems.  If the entity operates a fixed route system, and purchases or leases a new vehicle other than an automobile, a van with a seating capacity of less than eight persons (including the driver), it shall ensure that the vehicle is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

(c) Demand responsive systems.  If the entity operates a demand responsive system, and purchases or leases a new vehicle other than an automobile, a van with a seating capacity of less than eight persons (including the driver), it shall ensure that the vehicle is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, unless the system, when viewed in its entirety, meets the standard for equivalent service of § 37.105 of this part.

(d) Vans with a capacity of fewer than 8 persons.  If the entity operates either a fixed route or demand responsive system, and purchases or leases a new van with a seating capacity of fewer than eight persons including the driver (the solicitation for the vehicle being made after February 25, 1992), the entity shall ensure that the vehicle is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, unless the system, when viewed in its entirety, meets the standard for equivalent service of § 37.105 of this part.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 76 FR 57936, Sept. 19, 2011]

§ 37.105 Equivalent service standard.

For purposes of §§ 37.101 and 37.103 of this part, a fixed route system or demand responsive system, when viewed in its entirety, shall be deemed to provide equivalent service if the service available to individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, is provided in the most integrated setting appropriate to the needs of the individual and is equivalent to the service provided other individuals with respect to the following service characteristics:

(a) (1) Schedules/headways (if the system is fixed route);

(2) Response time (if the system is demand responsive);

(b) Fares;

(c) Geographic area of service;

(d) Hours and days of service;

(e) Availability of information;

(f) Reservations capability (if the system is demand responsive);

(g) Any constraints on capacity or service availability;

(h) Restrictions priorities based on trip purpose (if the system is demand responsive).

§ 37.107 Acquisition of passenger rail cars by private entities primarily engaged in the business of transporting people.

(a) A private entity which is primarily engaged in the business of transporting people and whose operations affect commerce, which makes a solicitation after February 25, 1992, to purchase or lease a new rail passenger car to be used in providing specified public transportation, shall ensure that the car is readily accessible to, and usable by, individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs. The accessibility standards in part 38 of this title which apply depend upon the type of service in which the car will be used.

(b) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, a private entity which is primarily engaged in transporting people and whose operations affect commerce, which remanufactures a rail passenger car to be used in providing specified public transportation to extend its useful life for ten years or more, or purchases or leases such a remanufactured rail car, shall ensure that the rail car, to the maximum extent feasible, is made readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs. For purposes of this paragraph, it shall be considered feasible to remanufacture a rail passenger car to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, unless an engineering analysis demonstrates that doing so would have a significant adverse effect on the structural integrity of the car.

(c) Compliance with paragraph (b) of this section is not required to the extent that it would significantly alter the historic or antiquated character of a historic or antiquated rail passenger car, or a rail station served exclusively by such cars, or would result in the violation of any rule, regulation, standard or order issued by the Secretary under the Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970. For purposes of this section, a historic or antiquated rail passenger car means a rail passenger car—

(1) Which is not less than 30 years old at the time of its use for transporting individuals;

(2) The manufacturer of which is no longer in the business of manufacturing rail passenger cars; and

(3) Which—

(i) Has a consequential association with events or persons significant to the past; or

(ii) Embodies, or is being restored to embody, the distinctive characteristics of a type of rail passenger car used in the past, or to represent a time period which has passed.

§ 37.109 Ferries and other passenger vessels operated by private entities. [Reserved]

§§ 37.111-37.119 [Reserved]

Subpart F—Paratransit as a Complement to Fixed Route Service

§ 37.121 Requirement for comparable complementary paratransit service.

(a) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, each public entity operating a fixed route system shall provide paratransit or other special service to individuals with disabilities that is comparable to the level of service provided to individuals without disabilities who use the fixed route system.

(b) To be deemed comparable to fixed route service, a complementary paratransit system shall meet the requirements of §§ 37.123-37.133 of this subpart. The requirement to comply with § 37.131 may be modified in accordance with the provisions of this subpart relating to undue financial burden.

(c) Requirements for complementary paratransit do not apply to commuter bus, commuter rail, or intercity rail systems.

§ 37.123 ADA paratransit eligibility: Standards.

(a) Public entities required by § 37.121 of this subpart to provide complementary paratransit service shall provide the service to the ADA paratransit eligible individuals described in paragraph (e) of this section.

(b) If an individual meets the eligibility criteria of this section with respect to some trips but not others, the individual shall be ADA paratransit eligible only for those trips for which he or she meets the criteria.

(c) Individuals may be ADA paratransit eligible on the basis of a permanent or temporary disability.

(d) Public entities may provide complementary paratransit service to persons other than ADA paratransit eligible individuals. However, only the cost of service to ADA paratransit eligible individuals may be considered in a public entity's request for an undue financial burden waiver under §§ 37.151-37.155 of this part.

(e) The following individuals are ADA paratransit eligible:

(1) Any individual with a disability who is unable, as the result of a physical or mental impairment (including a vision impairment), and without the assistance of another individual (except the operator of a wheelchair lift or other boarding assistance device), to board, ride, or disembark from any vehicle on the system which is readily accessible to and usable individuals with disabilities.

(2) Any individual with a disability who needs the assistance of a wheelchair lift or other boarding assistance device and is able, with such assistance, to board, ride and disembark from any vehicle which is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities if the individual wants to travel on a route on the system during the hours of operation of the system at a time, or within a reasonable period of such time, when such a vehicle is not being used to provide designated public transportation on the route.

(i) An individual is eligible under this paragraph with respect to travel on an otherwise accessible route on which the boarding or disembarking location which the individual would use is one at which boarding or disembarking from the vehicle is precluded as provided in § 37.167(g) of this part.

(ii) An individual using a common wheelchair is eligible under this paragraph if the individual's wheelchair cannot be accommodated on an existing vehicle (e.g., because the vehicle's lift does not meet the standards of part 38 of this title), even if that vehicle is accessible to other individuals with disabilities and their mobility wheelchairs.

(iii) With respect to rail systems, an individual is eligible under this paragraph if the individual could use an accessible rail system, but—

(A) There is not yet one accessible car per train on the system; or

(B) Key stations have not yet been made accessible.

(3) Any individual with a disability who has a specific impairment-related condition which prevents such individual from traveling to a boarding location or from a disembarking location on such system.

(i) Only a specific impairment-related condition which prevents the individual from traveling to a boarding location or from a disembarking location is a basis for eligibility under this paragraph. A condition which makes traveling to boarding location or from a disembarking location more difficult for a person with a specific impairment-related condition than for an individual who does not have the condition, but does not prevent the travel, is not a basis for eligibility under this paragraph.

(ii) Architectural barriers not under the control of the public entity providing fixed route service and environmental barriers (e.g., distance, terrain, weather) do not, standing alone, form a basis for eligibility under this paragraph. The interaction of such barriers with an individual's specific impairment-related condition may form a basis for eligibility under this paragraph, if the effect is to prevent the individual from traveling to a boarding location or from a disembarking location.

(f) Individuals accompanying an ADA paratransit eligible individual shall be provided service as follows:

(1) One other individual accompanying the ADA paratransit eligible individual shall be provided service—

(i) If the ADA paratransit eligible individual is traveling with a personal care attendant, the entity shall provide service to one other individual in addition to the attendant who is accompanying the eligible individual;

(ii) A family member or friend is regarded as a person accompanying the eligible individual, and not as a personal care attendant, unless the family member or friend registered is acting in the capacity of a personal care attendant;

(2) Additional individuals accompanying the ADA paratransit eligible individual shall be provided service, provided that space is available for them on the paratransit vehicle carrying the ADA paratransit eligible individual and that transportation of the additional individuals will not result in a denial of service to ADA paratransit eligible individuals;

(3) In order to be considered as “accompanying” the eligible individual for purposes of this paragraph (f), the other individual(s) shall have the same origin and destination as the eligible individual.

§ 37.125 ADA paratransit eligibility: Process.

Each public entity required to provide complementary paratransit service by § 37.121 of this part shall establish a process for determining ADA paratransit eligibility.

(a) The process shall strictly limit ADA paratransit eligibility to individuals specified in § 37.123 of this part.

(b) All information about the process, materials necessary to apply for eligibility, and notices and determinations concerning eligibility shall be made available in accessible formats, upon request.

(c) If, by a date 21 days following the submission of a complete application, the entity has not made a determination of eligibility, the applicant shall be treated as eligible and provided service until and unless the entity denies the application.

(d) The entity's determination concerning eligibility shall be in writing. If the determination is that the individual is ineligible, the determination shall state the reasons for the finding.

(e) The public entity shall provide documentation to each eligible individual stating that he or she is “ADA Paratransit Eligible.” The documentation shall include the name of the eligible individual, the name of the transit provider, the telephone number of the entity's paratransit coordinator, an expiration date for eligibility, and any conditions or limitations on the individual's eligibility including the use of a personal care attendant.

(f) The entity may require recertification of the eligibility of ADA paratransit eligible individuals at reasonable intervals.

(g) The entity shall establish an administrative appeal process through which individuals who are denied eligibility can obtain review of the denial.

(1) The entity may require that an appeal be filed within 60 days of the denial of an individual's application.

(2) The process shall include an opportunity to be heard and to present information and arguments, separation of functions (i.e., a decision by a person not involved with the initial decision to deny eligibility), and written notification of the decision, and the reasons for it.

(3) The entity is not required to provide paratransit service to the individual pending the determination on appeal. However, if the entity has not made a decision within 30 days of the completion of the appeal process, the entity shall provide paratransit service from that time until and unless a decision to deny the appeal is issued.

(h) The entity may establish an administrative process to suspend, for a reasonable period of time, the provision of complementary paratransit service to ADA eligible individuals who establish a pattern or practice of missing scheduled trips.

(1) Trips missed by the individual for reasons beyond his or her control (including, but not limited to, trips which are missed due to operator error) shall not be a basis for determining that such a pattern or practice exists.

(2) Before suspending service, the entity shall take the following steps:

(i) Notify the individual in writing that the entity proposes to suspend service, citing with specificity the basis of the proposed suspension and setting forth the proposed sanction.

(ii) Provide the individual an opportunity to be heard and to present information and arguments;

(iii) Provide the individual with written notification of the decision and the reasons for it.

(3) The appeals process of paragraph (g) of this section is available to an individual on whom sanctions have been imposed under this paragraph. The sanction is stayed pending the outcome of the appeal.

(i) In applications for ADA paratransit eligibility, the entity may require the applicant to indicate whether or not he or she travels with a personal care attendant.

§ 37.127 Complementary paratransit service for visitors.

(a) Each public entity required to provide complementary paratransit service under § 37.121 of this part shall make the service available to visitors as provided in this section.

(b) For purposes of this section, a visitor is an individual with disabilities who does not reside in the jurisdiction(s) served by the public entity or other entities with which the public entity provides coordinated complementary paratransit service within a region.

(c) Each public entity shall treat as eligible for its complementary paratransit service all visitors who present documentation that they are ADA paratransit eligible, under the criteria of § 37.125 of this part, in the jurisdiction in which they reside.

(d) With respect to visitors with disabilities who do not present such documentation, the public entity may require the documentation of the individual's place of residence and, if the individual's disability is not apparent, of his or her disability. The entity shall provide paratransit service to individuals with disabilities who qualify as visitors under paragraph (b) of this section. The entity shall accept a certification by such individuals that they are unable to use fixed route transit.

(e) A public entity shall make the service to a visitor required by this section available for any combination of 21 days during any 365-day period beginning with the visitor's first use of the service during such 365-day period. In no case shall the public entity require a visitor to apply for or receive eligibility certification from the public entity before receiving the service required by this section.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 61 FR 25416, May 21, 1996]

§ 37.129 Types of service.

(a) Except as provided in this section, complementary paratransit service for ADA paratransit eligible persons shall be origin-to-destination service.

(b) Complementary paratransit service for ADA paratransit eligible persons described in § 37.123(e)(2) of this part may also be provided by on-call bus service or paratransit feeder service to an accessible fixed route, where such service enables the individual to use the fixed route bus system for his or her trip.

(c) Complementary paratransit service for ADA eligible persons described in § 37.123(e)(3) of this part also may be provided by paratransit feeder service to and/or from an accessible fixed route.

§ 37.131 Service criteria for complementary paratransit.

The following service criteria apply to complementary paratransit required by § 37.121 of this part.

(a) Service Area —(1) Bus. (i) The entity shall provide complementary paratransit service to origins and destinations within corridors with a width of three-fourths of a mile on each side of each fixed route. The corridor shall include an area with a three-fourths of a mile radius at the ends of each fixed route.

(ii) Within the core service area, the entity also shall provide service to small areas not inside any of the corridors but which are surrounded by corridors.

(iii) Outside the core service area, the entity may designate corridors with widths from three-fourths of a mile up to one and one half miles on each side of a fixed route, based on local circumstances.

(iv) For purposes of this paragraph, the core service area is that area in which corridors with a width of three-fourths of a mile on each side of each fixed route merge together such that, with few and small exceptions, all origins and destinations within the area would be served.

(2) Rail. (i) For rail systems, the service area shall consist of a circle with a radius of 3⁄4 of a mile around each station.

(ii) At end stations and other stations in outlying areas, the entity may designate circles with radii of up to 11⁄2 miles as part of its service area, based on local circumstances.

(3) Jurisdictional boundaries.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this paragraph, an entity is not required to provide paratransit service in an area outside the boundaries of the jurisdiction(s) in which it operates, if the entity does not have legal authority to operate in that area. The entity shall take all practicable steps to provide paratransit service to any part of its service area.

(b) Response time.  The entity shall schedule and provide paratransit service to any ADA paratransit eligible person at any requested time on a particular day in response to a request for service made the previous day. Reservations may be taken by reservation agents or by mechanical means.

(1) The entity shall make reservation service available during at least all normal business hours of the entity's administrative offices, as well as during times, comparable to normal business hours, on a day when the entity's offices are not open before a service day.

(2) The entity may negotiate pickup times with the individual, but the entity shall not require an ADA paratransit eligible individual to schedule a trip to begin more than one hour before or after the individual's desired departure time.

(3) The entity may use real-time scheduling in providing complementary paratransit service.

(4) The entity may permit advance reservations to be made up to 14 days in advance of an ADA paratransit eligible individual's desired trips. When an entity proposes to change its reservations system, it shall comply with the public participation requirements equivalent to those of § 37.137 (b) and (c).

(c) Fares.  The fare for a trip charged to an ADA paratransit eligible user of the complementary paratransit service shall not exceed twice the fare that would be charged to an individual paying full fare (i.e., without regard to discounts) for a trip of similar length, at a similar time of day, on the entity's fixed route system.

(1) In calculating the full fare that would be paid by an individual using the fixed route system, the entity may include transfer and premium charges applicable to a trip of similar length, at a similar time of day, on the fixed route system.

(2) The fares for individuals accompanying ADA paratransit eligible individuals, who are provided service under § 37.123 (f) of this part, shall be the same as for the ADA paratransit eligible individuals they are accompanying.

(3) A personal care attendant shall not be charged for complementary paratransit service.

(4) The entity may charge a fare higher than otherwise permitted by this paragraph to a social service agency or other organization for agency trips (i.e., trips guaranteed to the organization).

(d) Trip purpose restrictions.  The entity shall not impose restrictions or priorities based on trip purpose.

(e) Hours and days of service.  The complementary paratransit service shall be available throughout the same hours and days as the entity's fixed route service.

(f) Capacity constraints.  The entity shall not limit the availability of complementary paratransit service to ADA paratransit eligible individuals by any of the following:

(1) Restrictions on the number of trips an individual will be provided;

(2) Waiting lists for access to the service; or

(3) Any operational pattern or practice that significantly limits the availability of service to ADA paratransit eligible persons.

(i) Such patterns or practices include, but are not limited to, the following:

(A) Substantial numbers of significantly untimely pickups for initial or return trips;

(B) Substantial numbers of trip denials or missed trips;

(C) Substantial numbers of trips with excessive trip lengths.

(ii) Operational problems attributable to causes beyond the control of the entity (including, but not limited to, weather or traffic conditions affecting all vehicular traffic that were not anticipated at the time a trip was scheduled) shall not be a basis for determining that such a pattern or practice exists.

(g) Additional service.  Public entities may provide complementary paratransit service to ADA paratransit eligible individuals exceeding that provided for in this section. However, only the cost of service provided for in this section may be considered in a public entity's request for an undue financial burden waiver under §§ 37.151-37.155 of this part.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 61 FR 25416, May 21, 1996; 71 FR 63266, Oct. 30, 2006]

§ 37.133 Subscription service.

(a) This part does not prohibit the use of subscription service by public entities as part of a complementary paratransit system, subject to the limitations in this section.

(b) Subscription service may not absorb more than fifty percent of the number of trips available at a given time of day, unless there is non-subscription capacity.

(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, the entity may establish waiting lists or other capacity constraints and trip purpose restrictions or priorities for participation in the subscription service only.

§ 37.135 Submission of paratransit plan.

(a) General.  Each public entity operating fixed route transportation service, which is required by § 37.121 to provide complementary paratransit service, shall develop a paratransit plan.

(b) Initial submission.  Except as provided in § 37.141 of this part, each entity shall submit its initial plan for compliance with the complementary paratransit service provision by January 26, 1992, to the appropriate location identified in paragraph (f) of this section.

(c) Annual Updates.  Except as provided in this paragraph, each entity shall submit an annual update to its plan on January 26 of each succeeding year.

(1) If an entity has met and is continuing to meet all requirements for complementary paratransit in §§ 37.121-37.133 of this part, the entity may submit to FTA an annual certification of continued compliance in lieu of a plan update. Entities that have submitted a joint plan under § 37.141 may submit a joint certification under this paragraph. The requirements of §§ 37.137 (a) and (b), 37.138 and 37.139 do not apply when a certification is submitted under this paragraph.

(2) In the event of any change in circumstances that results in an entity which has submitted a certification of continued compliance falling short of compliance with §§ 37.121-37.133, the entity shall immediately notify FTA in writing of the problem. In this case, the entity shall also file a plan update meeting the requirements of §§ 37.137-37.139 of this part on the next following January 26 and in each succeeding year until the entity returns to full compliance.

(3) An entity that has demonstrated undue financial burden to the FTA shall file a plan update meeting the requirements of §§ 37.137-37.139 of this part on each January 26 until full compliance with §§ 37.121-37.133 is attained.

(4) If FTA reasonably believes that an entity may not be fully complying with all service criteria, FTA may require the entity to provide an annual update to its plan.

(d) Phase-in of implementation.  Each plan shall provide full compliance by no later than January 26, 1997, unless the entity has received a waiver based on undue financial burden. If the date for full compliance specified in the plan is after January 26, 1993, the plan shall include milestones, providing for measured, proportional progress toward full compliance.

(e) Plan implementation.  Each entity shall begin implementation of its plan on January 26, 1992.

(f) Submission locations.  An entity shall submit its plan to one of the following offices, as appropriate:

(1) The individual state administering agency, if it is—

(i) A recipient of funding under 49 U.S.C. 5311;

(ii) A small urbanized area recipient of funding under 49 U.S.C. 5307 administered by the State;

(iii) A participant in a coordinated plan, in which all of the participating entities are eligible to submit their plans to the State; or

(2) The FTA Regional Office (as listed in appendix B to this part) for all other entities required to submit a paratransit plan. This includes an FTA recipient under 49 U.S.C. 5307; entities submitting a joint plan (unless they meet the requirements of paragraph (f)(1)(iii) of this section), and a public entity not an FTA recipient.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 61 FR 25416, May 21, 1996; 61 FR 26468, May 28, 1996; 79 FR 21406, Apr. 16, 2014]

§ 37.137 Paratransit plan development.

(a) Survey of existing services.  Each submitting entity shall survey the area to be covered by the plan to identify any person or entity (public or private) which provides a paratransit or other special transportation service for ADA paratransit eligible individuals in the service area to which the plan applies.

(b) Public participation.  Each submitting entity shall ensure public participation in the development of its paratransit plan, including at least the following:

(1) Outreach.  Each submitting entity shall solicit participation in the development of its plan by the widest range of persons anticipated to use its paratransit service. Each entity shall develop contacts, mailing lists and other appropriate means for notification of opportunities to participate in the development of the paratransit plan;

(2) Consultation with individuals with disabilities.  Each entity shall contact individuals with disabilities and groups representing them in the community. Consultation shall begin at an early stage in the plan development and should involve persons with disabilities in all phases of plan development. All documents and other information concerning the planning procedure and the provision of service shall be available, upon request, to members of the public, except where disclosure would be an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy;

(3) Opportunity for public comment.  The submitting entity shall make its plan available for review before the plan is finalized. In making the plan available for public review, the entity shall ensure that the plan is available upon request in accessible formats;

(4) Public hearing.  The entity shall sponsor at a minimum one public hearing and shall provide adequate notice of the hearing, including advertisement in appropriate media, such as newspapers of general and special interest circulation and radio announcements; and

(5) Special requirements.  If the entity intends to phase-in its paratransit service over a multi-year period, or request a waiver based on undue financial burden, the public hearing shall afford the opportunity for interested citizens to express their views concerning the phase-in, the request, and which service criteria may be delayed in implementation.

(c) Ongoing requirement.  The entity shall create an ongoing mechanism for the participation of individuals with disabilities in the continued development and assessment of services to persons with disabilities. This includes, but is not limited to, the development of the initial plan, any request for an undue financial burden waiver, and each annual submission.

§ 37.139 Plan contents.

Each plan shall contain the following information:

(a) Identification of the entity or entities submitting the plan, specifying for each—

(1) Name and address; and

(2) Contact person for the plan, with telephone number and facsimile telephone number (FAX), if applicable.

(b) A description of the fixed route system as of January 26, 1992 (or subsequent year for annual updates), including—

(1) A description of the service area, route structure, days and hours of service, fare structure, and population served. This includes maps and tables, if appropriate;

(2) The total number of vehicles (bus, van, or rail) operated in fixed route service (including contracted service), and percentage of accessible vehicles and percentage of routes accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities, including persons who use wheelchairs;

(3) Any other information about the fixed route service that is relevant to establishing the basis for comparability of fixed route and paratransit service.

(c) A description of existing paratransit services, including:

(1) An inventory of service provided by the public entity submitting the plan;

(2) An inventory of service provided by other agencies or organizations, which may in whole or in part be used to meet the requirement for complementary paratransit service; and

(3) A description of the available paratransit services in paragraphs (c)(2) and (c)(3) of this section as they relate to the service criteria described in § 37.131 of this part of service area, response time, fares, restrictions on trip purpose, hours and days of service, and capacity constraints; and to the requirements of ADA paratransit eligibility.

(d) A description of the plan to provide comparable paratransit, including:

(1) An estimate of demand for comparable paratransit service by ADA eligible individuals and a brief description of the demand estimation methodology used;

(2) An analysis of differences between the paratransit service currently provided and what is required under this part by the entity(ies) submitting the plan and other entities, as described in paragraph (c) of this section;

(3) A brief description of planned modifications to existing paratransit and fixed route service and the new paratransit service planned to comply with the ADA paratransit service criteria;

(4) A description of the planned comparable paratransit service as it relates to each of the service criteria described in § 37.131 of this part—service area, absence of restrictions or priorities based on trip purpose, response time, fares, hours and days of service, and lack of capacity constraints. If the paratransit plan is to be phased in, this paragraph shall be coordinated with the information being provided in paragraphs (d)(5) and (d)(6) of this paragraph;

(5) A timetable for implementing comparable paratransit service, with a specific date indicating when the planned service will be completely operational. In no case may full implementation be completed later than January 26, 1997. The plan shall include milestones for implementing phases of the plan, with progress that can be objectively measured yearly;

(6) A budget for comparable paratransit service, including capital and operating expenditures over five years.

(e) A description of the process used to certify individuals with disabilities as ADA paratransit eligible. At a minimum, this must include—

(1) A description of the application and certification process, including—

(i) The availability of information about the process and application materials inaccessible formats;

(ii) The process for determining eligibility according to the provisions of §§ 37.123-37.125 of this part and notifying individuals of the determination made;

(iii) The entity's system and timetable for processing applications and allowing presumptive eligibility; and

(iv) The documentation given to eligible individuals.

(2) A description of the administrative appeals process for individuals denied eligibility.

(3) A policy for visitors, consistent with § 37.127 of this part.

(f) Description of the public participation process including—

(1) Notice given of opportunity for public comment, the date(s) of completed public hearing(s), availability of the plan in accessible formats, outreach efforts, and consultation with persons with disabilities.

(2) A summary of significant issues raised during the public comment period, along with a response to significant comments and discussion of how the issues were resolved.

(g) Efforts to coordinate service with other entities subject to the complementary paratransit requirements of this part which have overlapping or contiguous service areas or jurisdictions.

(h) The following endorsements or certifications:

(1) A resolution adopted by the board of the entity authorizing the plan, as submitted. If more than one entity is submitting the plan there must be an authorizing resolution from each board. If the entity does not function with a board, a statement shall be submitted by the entity's chief executive;

(2) In urbanized areas, certification by the Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) that it has reviewed the plan and that the plan is in conformance with the transportation plan developed under the Federal Transit/Federal Highway Administration joint planning regulation (49 CFR part 613 and 23 CFR part 450). In a service area which is covered by more than one MPO, each applicable MPO shall certify conformity of the entity's plan. The provisions of this paragraph do not apply to non-FTA recipients;

(3) A certification that the survey of existing paratransit service was conducted as required in § 37.137(a) of this part;

(4) To the extent service provided by other entities is included in the entity's plan for comparable paratransit service, the entity must certify that:

(i) ADA paratransit eligible individuals have access to the service;

(ii) The service is provided in the manner represented; and

(iii) Efforts will be made to coordinate the provision of paratransit service by other providers.

(i) A request for a waiver based on undue financial burden, if applicable. The waiver request should include information sufficient for FTA to consider the factors in § 37.155 of this part. If a request for an undue financial burden waiver is made, the plan must include a description of additional paratransit services that would be provided to achieve full compliance with the requirement for comparable paratransit in the event the waiver is not granted, and the timetable for the implementation of these additional services.

(j) Annual plan updates. (1) The annual plan updates submitted January 26, 1993, and annually thereafter, shall include information necessary to update the information requirements of this section. Information submitted annually must include all significant changes and revisions to the timetable for implementation;

(2) If the paratransit service is being phased in over more than one year, the entity must demonstrate that the milestones identified in the current paratransit plans have been achieved. If the milestones have not been achieved, the plan must explain any slippage and what actions are being taken to compensate for the slippage.

(3) The annual plan must describe specifically the means used to comply with the public participation requirements, as described in § 37.137 of this part.

§ 37.141 Requirements for a joint paratransit plan.

(a) Two or more entities with overlapping or contiguous service areas or jurisdictions may develop and submit a joint plan providing for coordinated paratransit service. Joint plans shall identify the participating entities and indicate their commitment to participate in the plan.

(b) To the maximum extent feasible, all elements of the coordinated plan shall be submitted on January 26, 1992. If a coordinated plan is not completed by January 26, 1992, those entities intending to coordinate paratransit service must submit a general statement declaring their intention to provide coordinated service and each element of the plan specified in § 37.139 to the extent practicable. In addition, the plan must include the following certifications from each entity involved in the coordination effort:

(1) A certification that the entity is committed to providing ADA paratransit service as part of a coordinated plan.

(2) A certification from each public entity participating in the plan that it will maintain current levels of paratransit service until the coordinated plan goes into effect.

(c) Entities submitting the above certifications and plan elements in lieu of a completed plan on January 26, 1992, must submit a complete plan by July 26, 1992.

(d) Filing of an individual plan does not preclude an entity from cooperating with other entities in the development or implementation of a joint plan. An entity wishing to join with other entities after its initial submission may do so by meeting the filing requirements of this section.

§ 37.143 Paratransit plan implementation.

(a) Each entity shall begin implementation of its complementary paratransit plan, pending notice from FTA. The implementation of the plan shall be consistent with the terms of the plan, including any specified phase-in period.

(b) If the plan contains a request for a wavier based on undue financial burden, the entity shall begin implementation of its plan, pending a determination on its waiver request.

§ 37.145 State comment on plans.

Each state required to receive plans under § 37.135 of this part shall:

(a) Ensure that all applicable recipients of funding under 49 U.S.C. 5307 or 49 U.S.C. 5311 have submitted plans.

(b) Certify to FTA that all plans have been received.

(c) Forward the required certification with comments on each plan to FTA. The plans, with comments, shall be submitted to FTA no later than April 1, 1992, for the first year and April 1 annually thereafter.

(d) The State shall develop comments to on each plan, responding to the following points:

(1) Was the plan filed on time?

(2) Does the plan appear reasonable?

(3) Are there circumstances that bear on the ability of the grantee to carry out the plan as represented? If yes, please elaborate.

(4) Is the plan consistent with statewide planning activities?

(5) Are the necessary anticipated financial and capital resources identified in the plan accurately estimated?

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 79 FR 21406, Apr. 16, 2014]

§ 37.147 Considerations during FTA review.

In reviewing each plan, at a minimum FTA will consider the following:

(a) Whether the plan was filed on time;

(b) Comments submitted by the state, if applicable;

(c) Whether the plan contains responsive elements for each component required under § 37.139 of this part;

(d) Whether the plan, when viewed in its entirety, provides for paratransit service comparable to the entity's fixed route service;

(e) Whether the entity complied with the public participation efforts required by this part; and

(f) The extent to which efforts were made to coordinate with other public entities with overlapping or contiguous service areas or jurisdictions.

§ 37.149 Disapproved plans.

(a) If a plan is disapproved in whole or in part, FTA will specify which provisions are disapproved. Each entity shall amend its plan consistent with this information and resubmit the plan to the appropriate FTA Regional Office within 90 days of receipt of the disapproval letter.

(b) Each entity revising its plan shall continue to comply with the public participation requirements applicable to the initial development of the plan (set out in § 37.137 of this part).

§ 37.151 Waiver for undue financial burden.

If compliance with the service criteria of § 37.131 of this part creates an undue financial burden, an entity may request a waiver from all or some of the provisions if the entity has complied with the public participation requirements in § 37.137 of this part and if the following conditions apply:

(a) At the time of submission of the initial plan on January 26, 1992—

(1) The entity determines that it cannot meet all of the service criteria by January 26, 1997; or

(2) The entity determines that it cannot make measured progress toward compliance in any year before full compliance is required. For purposes of this part, measured progress means implementing milestones as scheduled, such as incorporating an additional paratransit service criterion or improving an aspect of a specific service criterion.

(b) At the time of its annual plan update submission, if the entity believes that circumstances have changed since its last submission, and it is no longer able to comply by January 26, 1997, or make measured progress in any year before 1997, as described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section.

§ 37.153 FTA waiver determination.

(a) The Administrator will determine whether to grant a waiver for undue financial burden on a case-by-case basis, after considering the factors identified in § 37.155 of this part and the information accompanying the request. If necessary, the Administrator will return the application with a request for additional information.

(b) Any waiver granted will be for a limited and specified period of time.

(c) If the Administrator grants the applicant a waiver, the Administrator will do one of the following:

(1) Require the public entity to provide complementary paratransit to the extent it can do so without incurring an undue financial burden. The entity shall make changes in its plan that the Administrator determines are appropriate to maximize the complementary paratransit service that is provided to ADA paratransit eligible individuals. When making changes to its plan, the entity shall use the public participation process specified for plan development and shall consider first a reduction in number of trips provided to each ADA paratransit eligible person per month, while attempting to meet all other service criteria.

(2) Require the public entity to provide basic complementary paratransit services to all ADA paratransit eligible individuals, even if doing so would cause the public entity to incur an undue financial burden. Basic complementary paratransit service in corridors defined as provided in § 37.131(a) along the public entity's key routes during core service hours.

(i) For purposes of this section, key routes are defined as routes along which there is service at least hourly throughout the day.

(ii) For purposes of this section, core service hours encompass at least peak periods, as these periods are defined locally for fixed route service, consistent with industry practice.

(3) If the Administrator determines that the public entity will incur an undue financial burden as the result of providing basic complementary paratransit service, such that it is infeasible for the entity to provide basic complementary paratransit service, the Administrator shall require the public entity to coordinate with other available providers of demand responsive service in the area served by the public entity to maximize the service to ADA paratransit eligible individuals to the maximum extent feasible.

§ 37.155 Factors in decision to grant an undue financial burden waiver.

(a) In making an undue financial burden determination, the FTA Administrator will consider the following factors:

(1) Effects on current fixed route service, including reallocation of accessible fixed route vehicles and potential reduction in service, measured by service miles;

(2) Average number of trips made by the entity's general population, on a per capita basis, compared with the average number of trips to be made by registered ADA paratransit eligible persons, on a per capita basis;

(3) Reductions in other services, including other special services;

(4) Increases in fares;

(5) Resources available to implement complementary paratransit service over the period covered by the plan;

(6) Percentage of budget needed to implement the plan, both as a percentage of operating budget and a percentage of entire budget;

(7) The current level of accessible service, both fixed route and paratransit;

(8) Cooperation/coordination among area transportation providers;

(9) Evidence of increased efficiencies, that have been or could be effectuated, that would benefit the level and quality of available resources for complementary paratransit service; and

(10) Unique circumstances in the submitting entity's area that affect the ability of the entity to provide paratransit, that militate against the need to provide paratransit, or in some other respect create a circumstance considered exceptional by the submitting entity.

(b) (1) Costs attributable to complementary paratransit shall be limited to costs of providing service specifically required by this part to ADA paratransit eligible individuals, by entities responsible under this part for providing such service.

(2) If the entity determines that it is impracticable to distinguish between trips mandated by the ADA and other trips on a trip-by-trip basis, the entity shall attribute to ADA complementary paratransit requirements a percentage of its overall paratransit costs. This percentage shall be determined by a statistically valid methodology that determines the percentage of trips that are required by this part. The entity shall submit information concerning its methodology and the data on which its percentage is based with its request for a waiver. Only costs attributable to ADA-mandated trips may be considered with respect to a request for an undue financial burden waiver.

(3) Funds to which the entity would be legally entitled, but which, as a matter of state or local funding arrangements, are provided to another entity and used by that entity to provide paratransit service which is part of a coordinated system of paratransit meeting the requirements of this part, may be counted in determining the burden associated with the waiver request.

§§ 37.157-37.159 [Reserved]

Subpart G—Provision of Service

§ 37.161 Maintenance of accessible features: General.

(a) Public and private entities providing transportation services shall maintain in operative condition those features of facilities and vehicles that are required to make the vehicles and facilities readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. These features include, but are not limited to, lifts and other means of access to vehicles, securement devices, elevators, signage and systems to facilitate communications with persons with impaired vision or hearing.

(b) Accessibility features shall be repaired promptly if they are damaged or out of order. When an accessibility feature is out of order, the entity shall take reasonable steps to accommodate individuals with disabilities who would otherwise use the feature.

(c) This section does not prohibit isolated or temporary interruptions in service or access due to maintenance or repairs.

§ 37.163 Keeping vehicle lifts in operative condition: Public entities.

(a) This section applies only to public entities with respect to lifts in non-rail vehicles.

(b) The entity shall establish a system of regular and frequent maintenance checks of lifts sufficient to determine if they are operative.

(c) The entity shall ensure that vehicle operators report to the entity, by the most immediate means available, any failure of a lift to operate in service.

(d) Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, when a lift is discovered to be inoperative, the entity shall take the vehicle out of service before the beginning of the vehicle's next service day and ensure that the lift is repaired before the vehicle returns to service.

(e) If there is no spare vehicle available to take the place of a vehicle with an inoperable lift, such that taking the vehicle out of service will reduce the transportation service the entity is able to provide, the public entity may keep the vehicle in service with an inoperable lift for no more than five days (if the entity serves an area of 50,000 or less population) or three days (if the entity serves an area of over 50,000 population) from the day on which the lift is discovered to be inoperative.

(f) In any case in which a vehicle is operating on a fixed route with an inoperative lift, and the headway to the next accessible vehicle on the route exceeds 30 minutes, the entity shall promptly provide alternative transportation to individuals with disabilities who are unable to use the vehicle because its lift does not work.

§ 37.165 Lift and securement use.

(a) This section applies to public and private entities.

(b) Except as provided in this section, individuals using wheelchairs shall be transported in the entity's vehicles or other conveyances.

(1) With respect to wheelchair/occupant combinations that are larger or heavier than those to which the design standards for vehicles and equipment of 49 CFR part 38 refer, the entity must carry the wheelchair and occupant if the lift and vehicle can accommodate the wheelchair and occupant. The entity may decline to carry a wheelchair/occupant if the combined weight exceeds that of the lift specifications or if carriage of the wheelchair is demonstrated to be inconsistent with legitimate safety requirements.

(2) The entity is not required to permit wheelchairs to ride in places other than designated securement locations in the vehicle, where such locations exist.

(c) (1) For vehicles complying with part 38 of this title, the entity shall use the securement system to secure wheelchairs as provided in that Part.

(2) For other vehicles transporting individuals who use wheelchairs, the entity shall provide and use a securement system to ensure that the wheelchair remains within the securement area.

(3) The entity may require that an individual permit his or her wheelchair to be secured.

(d) The entity may not deny transportation to a wheelchair or its user on the ground that the device cannot be secured or restrained satisfactorily by the vehicle's securement system.

(e) The entity may recommend to a user of a wheelchair that the individual transfer to a vehicle seat. The entity may not require the individual to transfer.

(f) Where necessary or upon request, the entity's personnel shall assist individuals with disabilities with the use of securement systems, ramps and lifts. If it is necessary for the personnel to leave their seats to provide this assistance, they shall do so.

(g) The entity shall permit individuals with disabilities who do not use wheelchairs, including standees, to use a vehicle's lift or ramp to enter the vehicle. Provided, that an entity is not required to permit such individuals to use a lift Model 141 manufactured by EEC, Inc. If the entity chooses not to allow such individuals to use such a lift, it shall clearly notify consumers of this fact by signage on the exterior of the vehicle (adjacent to and of equivalent size with the accessibility symbol).

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 58 FR 63103, Nov. 30, 1993; 76 FR 57936, Sept. 19, 2011]

§ 37.167 Other service requirements.

(a) This section applies to public and private entities.

(b) On fixed route systems, the entity shall announce stops as follows:

(1) The entity shall announce at least at transfer points with other fixed routes, other major intersections and destination points, and intervals along a route sufficient to permit individuals with visual impairments or other disabilities to be oriented to their location.

(2) The entity shall announce any stop on request of an individual with a disability.

(c) Where vehicles or other conveyances for more than one route serve the same stop, the entity shall provide a means by which an individual with a visual impairment or other disability can identify the proper vehicle to enter or be identified to the vehicle operator as a person seeking a ride on a particular route.

(d) The entity shall permit service animals to accompany individuals with disabilities in vehicles and facilities.

(e) The entity shall ensure that vehicle operators and other personnel make use of accessibility-related equipment or features required by part 38 of this title.

(f) The entity shall make available to individuals with disabilities adequate information concerning transportation services. This obligation includes making adequate communications capacity available, through accessible formats and technology, to enable users to obtain information and schedule service.

(g) The entity shall not refuse to permit a passenger who uses a lift to disembark from a vehicle at any designated stop, unless the lift cannot be deployed, the lift will be damaged if it is deployed, or temporary conditions at the stop, not under the control of the entity, preclude the safe use of the stop by all passengers.

(h) The entity shall not prohibit an individual with a disability from traveling with a respirator or portable oxygen supply, consistent with applicable Department of Transportation rules on the transportation of hazardous materials (49 CFR subtitle B, chapter 1, subchapter C).

(i) The entity shall ensure that adequate time is provided to allow individuals with disabilities to complete boarding or disembarking from the vehicle.

(j) (1) When an individual with a disability enters a vehicle, and because of a disability, the individual needs to sit in a seat or occupy a wheelchair securement location, the entity shall ask the following persons to move in order to allow the individual with a disability to occupy the seat or securement location:

(i) Individuals, except other individuals with a disability or elderly persons, sitting in a location designated as priority seating for elderly and handicapped persons (or other seat as necessary);

(ii) Individuals sitting in or a fold-down or other movable seat in a wheelchair securement location.

(2) This requirement applies to light rail, rapid rail, and commuter rail systems only to the extent practicable.

(3) The entity is not required to enforce the request that other passengers move from priority seating areas or wheelchair securement locations.

(4) In all signage designating priority seating areas for elderly persons and persons with disabilities, or designating wheelchair securement areas, the entity shall include language informing persons sitting in these locations that they should comply with requests by transit provider personnel to vacate their seats to make room for an individual with a disability. This requirement applies to all fixed route vehicles when they are acquired by the entity or to new or replacement signage in the entity's existing fixed route vehicles.

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 58 FR 63103, Nov. 30, 1993]

§ 37.169 Process to be used by public entities providing designated public transportation service in considering requests for reasonable modification.

(a) (1) A public entity providing designated public transportation, in meeting the reasonable modification requirement of § 37.5(i)(3) with respect to its fixed route, demand responsive, and complementary paratransit services, shall respond to requests for reasonable modification to policies and practices consistent with this section.

(2) The public entity shall make information about how to contact the public entity to make requests for reasonable modifications readily available to the public through the same means it uses to inform the public about its policies and practices.

(3) This process shall be in operation no later than July 13, 2015.

(b) The process shall provide a means, accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, to request a modification in the entity's policies and practices applicable to its transportation services.

(1) Individuals requesting modifications shall describe what they need in order to use the service.

(2) Individuals requesting modifications are not required to use the term “reasonable modification” when making a request.

(3) Whenever feasible, requests for modifications shall be made and determined in advance, before the transportation provider is expected to provide the modified service, for example, during the paratransit eligibility process, through customer service inquiries, or through the entity's complaint process.

(4) Where a request for modification cannot practicably be made and determined in advance (e.g., because of a condition or barrier at the destination of a paratransit or fixed route trip of which the individual with a disability was unaware until arriving), operating personnel of the entity shall make a determination of whether the modification should be provided at the time of the request. Operating personnel may consult with the entity's management before making a determination to grant or deny the request.

(c) Requests for modification of a public entity's policies and practices may be denied only on one or more of the following grounds:

(1) Granting the request would fundamentally alter the nature of the entity's services, programs, or activities;

(2) Granting the request would create a direct threat to the health or safety of others;

(3) Without the requested modification, the individual with a disability is able to fully use the entity's services, programs, or activities for their intended purpose.

(d) In determining whether to grant a requested modification, public entities shall be guided by the provisions of Appendix E to this Part.

(e) In any case in which a public entity denies a request for a reasonable modification, the entity shall take, to the maximum extent possible, any other actions (that would not result in a direct threat or fundamental alteration) to ensure that the individual with a disability receives the services or benefit provided by the entity.

(f) (1) Public entities are not required to obtain prior approval from the Department of Transportation for the process required by this section.

(2) DOT agencies retain the authority to review an entity's process as part of normal program oversight.

[80 FR 13261, Mar. 13, 2015, as amended at 80 FR 26196, May 7, 2015]

§ 37.171 Equivalency requirement for demand responsive service operated by private entities not primarily engaged in the business of transporting people.

A private entity not primarily engaged in the business of transporting people which operates a demand responsive system shall ensure that its system, when viewed in its entirety, provides equivalent service to individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, as it does to individuals without disabilities. The standards of § 37.105 shall be used to determine if the entity is providing equivalent service.

§ 37.173 Training requirements.

Each public or private entity which operates a fixed route or demand responsive system shall ensure that personnel are trained to proficiency, as appropriate to their duties, so that they operate vehicles and equipment safely and properly assist and treat individuals with disabilities who use the service in a respectful and courteous way, with appropriate attention to the difference among individuals with disabilities.

Subpart H—Over-the-Road Buses (OTRBs)

Source:63 FR 51690, Sept. 28, 1998, unless otherwise noted.

§ 37.181 Applicability dates.

This subpart applies to all private entities that operate OTRBs. The requirements of the subpart begin to apply to large operators beginning October 30, 2000 and to small operators beginning October 29, 2001.

§ 37.183 Purchase or lease of new OTRBs by operators of fixed-route systems.

The following requirements apply to private entities that are primarily in the business of transporting people, whose operations affect commerce, and that operate a fixed-route system, with respect to OTRBs delivered to them on or after the date on which this subpart applies to them:

(a) Large operators.  If a large entity operates a fixed-route system, and purchases or leases a new OTRB for or in contemplation of use in that system, it shall ensure that the vehicle is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

(b) Small operators.  If a small entity operates a fixed-route system, and purchases or leases a new OTRB for or in contemplation of use in that system, it must do one of the following two things:

(1) Ensure that the vehicle is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs; or

(2) Ensure that equivalent service, as defined in § 37.105, is provided to individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs. To meet this equivalent service standard, the service provided by the operator must permit a wheelchair user to travel in his or her own mobility aid.

§ 37.185 Fleet accessibility requirement for OTRB fixed-route systems of large operators.

Each large operator subject to the requirements of § 37.183 shall ensure that—

(a) By October 30, 2006 no less than 50 percent of the buses in its fleet with which it provides fixed-route service are readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

(b) By October 29, 2012, 100 percent of the buses in its fleet with which it provides fixed-route service are readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

(c) Request for time extension.  An operator may apply to the Secretary for a time extension of the fleet accessibility deadlines of this section. If he or she grants the request, the Secretary sets a specific date by which the operator must meet the fleet accessibility requirement. In determining whether to grant such a request, the Secretary considers the following factors:

(1) Whether the operator has purchased or leased, since October 30, 2000, enough new OTRBs to replace 50 percent of the OTRBs with which it provides fixed-route service by October 30, 2006 or 100 percent of such OTRBs by October 29, 2012;

(2) Whether the operator has purchased or leased, between October 28, 1998 and October 30, 2000, a number of new inaccessible OTRBs significantly exceeding the number of buses it would normally obtain in such a period;

(3) The compliance with all requirements of this part by the operator over the period between October 28, 1998 and the request for time extension.

§ 37.187 Interline service.

(a) When the general public can purchase a ticket or make a reservation with one operator for a fixed-route trip of two or more stages in which another operator provides service, the first operator must arrange for an accessible bus, or equivalent service, as applicable, to be provided for each stage of the trip to a passenger with a disability. The following examples illustrate the provisions of this paragraph (a):

Example 1.

By going to Operator X's ticket office or calling X for a reservation, a passenger can buy or reserve a ticket from Point A through to Point C, transferring at intermediate Point B to a bus operated by Operator Y. Operator X is responsible for communicating immediately with Operator Y to ensure that Y knows that a passenger needing accessible transportation or equivalent service, as applicable, is traveling from Point B to Point C. By immediate communication, we mean that the ticket or reservation agent for Operator X, by phone, fax, computer, or other instantaneous means, contacts Operator Y the minute the reservation or ticketing transaction with the passenger, as applicable, has been completed. It is the responsibility of each carrier to know how to contact carriers with which it interlines (e.g., Operator X must know Operator Y's phone number).

Example 2.

Operator X fails to provide the required information in a timely manner to Operator Y. Operator X is responsible for compensating the passenger for the consequent unavailability of an accessible bus or equivalent service, as applicable, on the B-C leg of the interline trip.

(b) Each operator retains the responsibility for providing the transportation required by this subpart to the passenger for its portion of an interline trip. The following examples illustrate the provisions of this paragraph (b):

Example 1.

In Example 1 to paragraph (a) of this section, Operator X provides the required information to Operator Y in a timely fashion. However, Operator Y fails to provide an accessible bus or equivalent service to the passenger at Point B as the rules require. Operator Y is responsible for compensating the passenger as provided in § 37.199.

Example 2.

Operator X provides the required information to Operator Y in a timely fashion. However, the rules require Operator Y to provide an accessible bus on 48 hours' advance notice (i.e., as a matter of interim service under § 37.193(a) or service by a small mixed-service operator under § 37.191), and the passenger has purchased the ticket or made the reservation for the interline trip only 8 hours before Operator Y's bus leaves from Point B to go to Point C. In this situation, Operator Y is not responsible for providing an accessible bus to the passenger at Point B, any more than that it would be had the passenger directly contacted Operator Y to travel from Point B to Point C.

(c) All fixed-route operators involved in interline service shall ensure that they have the capacity to receive communications at all times concerning interline service for passengers with disabilities. The following examples illustrate the provisions of this paragraph (c):

Example 1.

Operator Y's office is staffed only during normal weekday business hours. Operator Y must have a means of receiving communications from carriers with which it interlines (e.g., telephone answering machine, fax, computer) when no one is in the office.

Example 2.

Operator Y has the responsibility to monitor its communications devices at reasonable intervals to ensure that it can act promptly on the basis of messages received. If Operator Y receives a message from Operator X on its answering machine on Friday night, notifying Y of the need for an accessible bus on Monday morning, it has the responsibility of making sure that the accessible bus is there on Monday morning. Operator Y is not excused from its obligation because no one checked the answering machine over the weekend.

§ 37.189 Service requirement for OTRB demand-responsive systems.

(a) This section applies to private entities primarily in the business of transporting people, whose operations affect commerce, and that provide demand-responsive OTRB service. Except as needed to meet the other requirements of this section, these entities are not required to purchase or lease accessible buses in connection with providing demand-responsive service.

(b) Demand-responsive operators shall ensure that, beginning one year from the date on which the requirements of this subpart begin to apply to the entity, any individual with a disability who requests service in an accessible OTRB receives such service. This requirement applies to both large and small operators.

(c) The operator may require up to 48 hours' advance notice to provide this service.

(d) If the individual with a disability does not provide the advance notice the operator requires under paragraph (a) of this section, the operator shall nevertheless provide the service if it can do so by making a reasonable effort.

(e) To meet this requirement, an operator is not required to fundamentally alter its normal reservation policies or to displace another passenger who has reserved a seat on the bus. The following examples illustrate the provisions of this paragraph (e):

Example 1.

A tour bus operator requires all passengers to reserve space on the bus three months before the trip date. This requirement applies to passengers with disabilities on the same basis as other passengers. Consequently, an individual passenger who is a wheelchair user would have to request an accessible bus at the time he or she made his reservation, at least three months before the trip date. If the individual passenger with a disability makes a request for space on the trip and an accessible OTRB 48 hours before the trip date, the operator could refuse the request because all passengers were required to make reservations three months before the trip date.

Example 2.

A group makes a reservation to charter a bus for a trip four weeks in advance. A week before the trip date, the group discovers that someone who signed up for the trip is a wheelchair user who needs an accessible bus, or someone who later buys a seat in the block of seats the group has reserved needs an accessible bus. A group representative or the passenger with a disability informs the bus company of this need more than 48 hours before the trip date. The bus company must provide an accessible bus.

Example 3.

While the operator's normal deadline for reserving space on a charter or tour trip has passed, a number of seats for a trip are unfilled. The operator permits members of the public to make late reservations for the unfilled seats. If a passenger with a disability calls 48 hours before the trip is scheduled to leave and requests a seat and the provision of an accessible OTRB, the operator must meet this request, as long as it does not displace another passenger with a reservation.

Example 4.

A tour bus trip is nearly sold out three weeks in advance of the trip date. A passenger with a disability calls 48 hours before the trip is scheduled to leave and requests a seat and the provision of an accessible OTRB. The operator need not meet this request if it will have the effect of displacing a passenger with an existing reservation. If other passengers would not be displaced, the operator must meet this request.

§ 37.191 Special provision for small mixed-service operators.

(a) For purposes of this section, a small mixed-service operator is a small operator that provides both fixed-route and demand-responsive service and does not use more than 25 percent of its buses for fixed-route service.

(b) An operator meeting the criteria of paragraph (a) of this section may conduct all its trips, including fixed-route trips, on an advance-reservation basis as provided for demand-responsive trips in § 37.189. Such an operator is not required to comply with the accessible bus acquisition/equivalent service obligations of § 37.183(b).

§ 37.193 Interim service requirements.

(a) Until 100 percent of the fleet of a large or small operator uses to provide fixed-route service is composed of accessible OTRBs, the operator shall meet the following interim service requirements:

(1) Beginning one year from the date on which the requirements of this subpart begin to apply to the operator, it shall ensure that any individual with a disability that requests service in an accessible OTRB receives such service.

(i) The operator may require up to 48 hours' advance notice to provide this service.

(ii) If the individual with a disability does not provide the advance notice the operator requires, the operator shall nevertheless provide the service if it can do so by making a reasonable effort.

(iii) If the trip on which the person with a disability wishes to travel is already provided by an accessible bus, the operator has met this requirement.

(2) Interim service under this paragraph (a) is not required to be provided by a small operator who is providing equivalent service to its fixed-route service as provided in § 37.183(b)(2).

(b) Some small fixed-route operators may never have a fleet 100 percent of which consists of accessible buses (e.g., a small fixed-route operator who exclusively or primarily purchases or leases used buses). Such an operator must continue to comply with the requirements of this section with respect to any service that is not provided entirely with accessible buses.

(c) [Reserved]

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 76 FR 57936, Sept. 19, 2011]

§ 37.195 Purchase or lease of OTRBs by private entities not primarily in the business of transporting people.

This section applies to all purchases or leases of new vehicles by private entities which are not primarily engaged in the business of transporting people, with respect to buses delivered to them on or after the date on which this subpart begins to apply to them.

(a) Fixed-route systems.  If the entity operates a fixed-route system and purchases or leases an OTRB for or in contemplation of use on the system, it shall meet the requirements of § 37.183 (a) or (b), as applicable.

(b) Demand-responsive systems.  The requirements of § 37.189 apply to demand-responsive systems operated by private entities not primarily in the business of transporting people. If such an entity operates a demand-responsive system, and purchases or leases an OTRB for or in contemplation of use on the system, it is not required to purchase or lease an accessible bus except as needed to meet the requirements of § 37.189.

§ 37.197 Remanufactured OTRBs.

(a) This section applies to any private entity operating OTRBs that takes one of the following actions:

(1) On or after the date on which this subpart applies to the entity, it remanufactures an OTRB so as to extend its useful life for five years or more or makes a solicitation for such remanufacturing; or

(2) Purchases or leases an OTRB which has been remanufactured so as to extend its useful life for five years or more, where the purchase or lease occurs after the date on which this subpart applies to the entity and during the period in which the useful life of the vehicle is extended.

(b) In any situation in which this subpart requires an entity purchasing or leasing a new OTRB to purchase or lease an accessible OTRB, OTRBs acquired through the actions listed in paragraph (a) of this section shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

(c) For purposes of this section, it shall be considered feasible to remanufacture an OTRB so as to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, unless an engineering analysis demonstrates that including accessibility features required by this part would have a significant adverse effect on the structural integrity of the vehicle.

§ 37.199 [Reserved]

§ 37.201 Intermediate and rest stops.

(a) Whenever an OTRB makes an intermediate or rest stop, a passenger with a disability, including an individual using a wheelchair, shall be permitted to leave and return to the bus on the same basis as other passengers. The operator shall ensure that assistance is provided to passengers with disabilities as needed to enable the passenger to get on and off the bus at the stop (e.g., operate the lift and provide assistance with securement; provide other boarding assistance if needed, as in the case of a wheelchair user who has transferred to a vehicle seat because other wheelchair users occupied all securement locations).

(b) If an OTRB operator owns, leases, or controls the facility at which a rest or intermediate stop is made, or if an OTRB operator contracts with the person who owns, leases, or controls such a facility to provide rest stop services, the OTRB operator shall ensure the facility complies fully with applicable requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act.

(c) If an OTRB equipped with an inaccessible restroom is making an express run of three hours or more without a rest stop, and a passenger with a disability who is unable to use the inaccessible restroom requests an unscheduled rest stop, the operator shall make a good faith effort to accommodate the request. The operator is not required to make the stop. However, if the operator does not make the stop, the operator shall explain to the passenger making the request the reason for its decision not to do so.

§ 37.203 Lift maintenance.

(a) The entity shall establish a system of regular and frequent maintenance checks of lifts sufficient to determine if they are operative.

(b) The entity shall ensure that vehicle operators report to the entity, by the most immediate means available, any failure of a lift to operate in service.

(c) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, when a lift is discovered to be inoperative, the entity shall take the vehicle out of service before the beginning of the vehicle's next trip and ensure that the lift is repaired before the vehicle returns to service.

(d) If there is no other vehicle available to take the place of an OTRB with an inoperable lift, such that taking the vehicle out of service before its next trip will reduce the transportation service the entity is able to provide, the entity may keep the vehicle in service with an inoperable lift for no more than five days from the day on which the lift is discovered to be inoperative.

§ 37.205 Additional passengers who use wheelchairs.

If a number of wheelchair users exceeding the number of securement locations on the bus seek to travel on a trip, the operator shall assign the securement locations on a first come-first served basis. The operator shall offer boarding assistance and the opportunity to sit in a vehicle seat to passengers who are not assigned a securement location. If the passengers who are not assigned securement locations are unable or unwilling to accept this offer, the operator is not required to provide transportation to them on the bus.

§ 37.207 Discriminatory practices.

It shall be considered discrimination for any operator to—

(a) Deny transportation to passengers with disabilities, except as provided in § 37.5(h);

(b) Use or request the use of persons other than the operator's employees (e.g., family members or traveling companions of a passenger with a disability, medical or public safety personnel) for routine boarding or other assistance to passengers with disabilities, unless the passenger requests or consents to assistance from such persons;

(c) Require or request a passenger with a disability to reschedule his or her trip, or travel at a time other than the time the passenger has requested, in order to receive transportation as required by this subpart;

(d) Fail to provide reservation services to passengers with disabilities equivalent to those provided other passengers; or

(e) Fail or refuse to comply with any applicable provision of this part.

§ 37.209 Training and other requirements.

OTRB operators shall comply with the requirements of §§ 37.161, 37.165-37.167, and 37.173. For purposes of § 37.173, “training to proficiency” is deemed to include, as appropriate to the duties of particular employees, training in proper operation and maintenance of accessibility features and equipment, boarding assistance, securement of mobility aids, sensitive and appropriate interaction with passengers with disabilities, handling and storage of mobility devices, and familiarity with the requirements of this subpart. OTRB operators shall provide refresher training to personnel as needed to maintain proficiency.

§ 37.211 Effect of NHTSA and FHWA safety rules.

OTRB operators are not required to take any action under this subpart that would violate an applicable National Highway Traffic Safety Administration or Federal Highway Administration safety rule.

§ 37.213 Information collection requirements.

(a) This paragraph (a) applies to demand-responsive operators under § 37.189 and fixed-route operators under § 37.193(a)(1) that are required to, and small mixed-service operators under § 37.191 that choose to, provide accessible OTRB service on 48 hours' advance notice.

(1) When the operator receives a request for an accessible bus or equivalent service, the operator shall complete lines 1-9 of the Service Request Form in Appendix A to this subpart. The operator shall transmit a copy of the form to the passenger no later than the end of the next business day following the receipt of the request. The passenger shall be required to make only one request, which covers all legs of the requested trip (e.g., in the case of a round trip, both the outgoing and return legs of the trip; in the case of a multi-leg trip, all connecting legs).

(2) The passenger shall be required to make only one request, which covers all legs of the requested trip (e.g., in the case of a round trip, both the outgoing and return legs of the trip; in the case of a multi-leg trip, all connecting legs). The operator shall transmit a copy of the form to the passenger in one of the following ways:

(i) By first-class United States mail. The operator shall transmit the form no later than the end of the next business day following the request;

(ii) By telephone or email. If the passenger can receive the confirmation by this method, then the operator shall provide a unique confirmation number to the passenger when the request is made and provide a paper copy of the form when the passenger arrives for the requested trip; or

(iii) By facsimile transmission. If the passenger can receive the confirmation by this method, then the operator shall transmit the form within twenty-four hours of the request for transportation.

(3) The operator shall retain its copy of the completed form for five years. The operator shall make these forms available to Department of Transportation or Department of Justice officials at their request.

(4) Beginning October 29, 2001, for large operators, and October 28, 2002, for small operators, and on the last Monday in October in each year thereafter, each operator shall submit a summary of its forms to the Department of Transportation. The summary shall state the number of requests for accessible bus service and the number of times these requests were met. It shall also include the name, address, telephone number, and contact person name for the operator.

(b) This paragraph (b) applies to small fixed route operators who choose to provide equivalent service to passengers with disabilities under § 37.183(b)(2).

(1) The operator shall complete the Service Request Form in Appendix A to this subpart on every occasion on which a passenger with a disability needs equivalent service in order to be provided transportation.

(2) The passenger shall be required to make only one request, which covers all legs of the requested trip (e.g., in the case of a round trip, both the outgoing and return legs of the trip; in the case of a multi-leg trip, all connecting legs). The operator shall transmit a copy of the form to the passenger, and whenever the equivalent service is not provided, in one of the following ways:

(i) By first-class United States mail. The operator shall transmit the form no later than the end of the next business day following the request for equivalent service;

(ii) By telephone or email. If the passenger can receive the confirmation by this method, then the operator shall provide a unique confirmation number to the passenger when the request for equivalent service is made and provide a paper copy of the form when the passenger arrives for the requested trip; or

(iii) By facsimile transmission. If the passenger can receive the confirmation by this method, then the operator shall transmit the form within twenty-four hours of the request for equivalent service.

(3) Beginning on October 28, 2002 and on the last Monday in October in each year therafter, each operator shall submit a summary of its forms to the Department of Transportation. The summary shall state the number of situations in which equivalent service was needed and the number of times such service was provided. It shall also include the name, address, telephone number, and contact person name for the operator.

(c) This paragraph (c) applies to fixed-route operators.

(1) On March 26, 2001, each fixed-route large operator shall submit to the Department a report on how many passengers with disabilities used the lift to board accessible buses for the period of October 1999 to October 2000. For fixed-route operators, the report shall reflect separately the data pertaining to 48-hour advance reservation service and other service.

(2) Beginning on October 29, 2001 and on the last Monday in October in each year thereafter, each fixed-route operator shall submit to the Department, a report on how many passengers with disabilities used the lift to board accessible buses. For fixed-route operators, the report shall reflect separately the data pertaining to 48-hour advance reservation service and other service.

(d) This paragraph (d) applies to each over the road bus operator.

(1) On March 26, 2001, each operator shall submit to the Department, a summary report listing the number of new buses and used buses it has purchased or leased for the period of October 1998 through October 2000, and how many buses in each category are accessible. It shall also include the total number of buses in the operator's fleet and the name, address, telephone number, and contact person name for the operator.

(2) Beginning on October 29, 2001 and on the last Monday in October in each year thereafter, each operator shall submit to the Department, a summary report listing the number of new buses and used buses it has purchased or leased during the preceding year, and how many buses in each category are accessible. It shall also include the total number of buses in the operator's fleet and the name, address, telephone number, and contact person name for the operator.

(e) The information required to be submitted to the Department shall be sent to the following address: Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, Office of Data Analysis & Information System 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., Washington, D.C. 20590.

[66 FR 9053, Feb. 6, 2001, as amended at 69 FR 40796, July 7, 2004; 73 FR 33329, June 12, 2008]

§ 37.215 Review of requirements.

(a) Beginning October 28, 2005, the Department will review the requirements of § 37.189 and their implementation. The Department will complete this review by October 30, 2006.

(1) As part of this review, the Department will consider factors including, but not necessarily limited to, the following:

(i) The percentage of accessible buses in the demand-responsive fleets of large and small demand-responsive operators.

(ii) The success of small and large demand-responsive operators' service at meeting the requests of passengers with disabilities for accessible buses in a timely manner.

(iii) The ridership of small and large operators' demand-responsive service by passengers with disabilities.

(iv) The volume of complaints by passengers with disabilities.

(v) Cost and service impacts of implementation of the requirements of § 37.189.

(2) The Department will make one of the following decisions on the basis of the review:

(i) Retain § 37.189 without change; or

(ii) Modify the requirements of § 37.189 for large and/or small demand-responsive operators.

(b) Beginning October 30, 2006, the Department will review the requirements of §§ 37.183, 37.185, 37.187, 37.191 and 37.193(a) and their implementation. The Department will complete this review by October 29, 2007.

(1) As part of this review, the Department will consider factors including, but not necessarily limited to, the following:

(i) The percentage of accessible buses in the fixed-route fleets of large and small fixed-route operators.

(ii) The success of small and large fixed-route operators' interim or equivalent service at meeting the requests of passengers with disabilities for accessible buses in a timely manner.

(iii) The ridership of small and large operators' fixed-route service by passengers with disabilities.

(iv) The volume of complaints by passengers with disabilities.

(v) Cost and service impacts of implementation of the requirements of these sections.

(2) The Department will make one of the following decisions on the basis of the review:

(i) Retain §§ 37.183, 37.185, 37.187, 37.191, 37.193(a) without change; or

(ii) Modify the requirements of §§ 37.183, 37.185, 37.187, 37.191, 37.193(a) for large and/or small fixed-route operators.

Appendix A to Subpart H of Part 37—Service Request Form

Form for Advance Notice Requests and Provision of Equivalent Service 

1. Operator's name 

2. Address 

3. Phone number: 

4. Passenger's name: 

5. Address: 

6. Phone number: 

7. Scheduled date(s) and time(s) of trip(s): 

8. Date and time of request: 

9. Location(s) of need for accessible bus or equivalent service, as applicable: 

10. Was accessible bus or equivalent service, as applicable, provided for trip(s)? Yes ____ no ____ 

11. Was there a basis recognized by U.S. Department of transportation regulations for not providing an accessible bus or equivalent service, as applicable, for the trip(s)? Yes ____ no ____ 

If yes, explain 

[66 FR 9054, Feb. 6, 2001] 

Appendix A to Part 37—Modifications to Standards for Accessible Transportation Facilities

The Department of Transportation, in § 37.9 of this part, adopts as its regulatory standards for accessible transportation facilities the revised Americans with Disabilities Act Guidelines (ADAGG) issued by the Access Board on July 23, 2004. The ADAGG is codified in the Code of Federal Regulations in Appendices B and D of 36 CFR part 1191. Note the ADAAG may also be found via a hyperlink on the Internet at the following address: http://www.access-board.gov/ada-aba/final.htm. Like all regulations, the ADAAG also can be found by using the electronic Code of Federal Regulations at http://www.gpoaccess.gov/ecfr. Because the ADAAG has been established as a Federal consensus standard by the Access Board, the Department is not republishing the regulations in their entirety, but is adopting them by cross-reference as permitted under 1 CFR 21.21(c)(4). In a few instances, the Department has modified the language of the ADAAG as it applies to entities subject to 49 CFR part 37. These entities must comply with the modified language in this Appendix rather than the language of Appendices B and D to 36 CFR part 1191.

206.3 Location—Modification to 206.3 of Appendix B to 36 CFR Part 1191 

Accessible routes shall coincide with, or be located in the same area as general circulation paths. Where circulation paths are interior, required accessible routes shall also be interior. Elements such as ramps, elevators, or other circulation devices, fare vending or other ticketing areas, and fare collection areas shall be placed to minimize the distance which wheelchair users and other persons who cannot negotiate steps may have to travel compared to the general public.

406.8—Modification to 406 of Appendix D to 36 CFR Part 1191 

A curb ramp shall have a detectable warning complying with 705. The detectable warning shall extend the full width of the curb ramp (exclusive of flared sides) and shall extend either the full depth of the curb ramp or 24 inches (610 mm) deep minimum measured from the back of the curb on the ramp surface.

810.2.2 Dimensions—Modification to 810.2.2 of Appendix D to 36 CFR Part 1191 

Bus boarding and alighting areas shall provide a clear length of 96 inches (2440 mm), measured perpendicular to the curb or vehicle roadway edge, and a clear width of 60 inches (1525 mm), measured parallel to the vehicle roadway. Public entities shall ensure that the construction of bus boarding and alighting areas comply with 810.2.2, to the extent the construction specifications are within their control.

810.5.3 Platform and Vehicle Floor Coordination—Modification to 810.5.3 of Appendix D to 36 CFR Part 1191 

Station platforms shall be positioned to coordinate with vehicles in accordance with the applicable requirements of 36 CFR part 1192. Low-level platforms shall be 8 inches (205 mm) minimum above top of rail. In light rail, commuter rail, and intercity rail systems where it is not operationally or structurally feasible to meet the horizontal gap or vertical difference requirements of part 1192 or 49 CFR part 38, mini-high platforms, car-borne or platform-mounted lifts, ramps or bridge plates or similarly manually deployed devices, meeting the requirements of 49 CFR part 38, shall suffice.

EXCEPTION: Where vehicles are boarded from sidewalks or street-level, low-level platforms shall be permitted to be less than 8 inches (205 mm).

[71 FR 63266, Oct. 30, 2006] 

Appendix B to Part 37—FTA Regional Offices

Region 1, Federal Transit Administration, Transportation Systems Center, Kendall Square, 55 Broadway, Suite 920, Cambridge, MA 02142 

Region 2, Federal Transit Administration, One Bowling Green, Room 429, New York, NY 10004 

Region 3, Federal Transit Administration, 1760 Market Street, Suite 500, Philadelphia, PA 19103 

Region 4, Federal Transit Administration, 230 Peachtree NW., Suite 800, Atlanta, GA 30303 

Region 5, Federal Transit Administration, 200 West Adams Street, Suite 320, Chicago, IL 60606 

Region 6, Federal Transit Administration, 819 Taylor Street, Room 8A36, Fort Worth, TX 76102 

Region 7, Federal Transit Administration, 901 Locust Street, Suite 404, Kansas City, MO 64106 

Region 8, Federal Transit Administration, 12300 West Dakota Avenue, Suite 310, Lakewood, CO 80228 

Region 9, Federal Transit Administration, 201 Mission Street, Suite 1650, San Francisco, CA 94105 

Region 10, Federal Transit Administration, Jackson Federal Building, 915 Second Avenue, Suite 3142, Seattle, WA 98174 

[79 FR 21406, Apr. 16, 2014] 

Appendix C to Part 37—Certifications

Certification of Equivalent Service 

The (name of agency) certifies that its demand responsive service offered to individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, is equivalent to the level and quality of service offered to individuals without disabilities. Such service, when viewed in its entirety, is provided in the most integrated setting feasible and is equivalent with respect to:

(1) Response time;

(2) Fares;

(3) Geographic service area;

(4) Hours and days of service;

(5) Restrictions on trip purpose;

(6) Availability of information and reservation capability; and

(7) Constraints on capacity or service availability.

In accordance with 49 CFR 37.77, public entities operating demand responsive systems for the general public which receive financial assistance under 49 U.S.C. 5311 must file this certification with the appropriate state program office before procuring any inaccessible vehicle. Such public entities not receiving FTA funds shall also file the certification with the appropriate state program office. Such public entities receiving FTA funds under any other section of the FT Act must file the certification with the appropriate FTA regional office. This certification is valid for no longer than one year from its date of filing.

(name of authorized official) 

(title) 

(signature) 

MPO Certification of Paratransit Plan 

The (name of Metropolitan Planning Organization) hereby certifies that it has reviewed the ADA paratransit plan prepared by (name of submitting entity (ies)) as required under 49 CFR part 37. 139(h) and finds it to be in conformance with the transportation plan developed under 49 CFR part 613 and 23 CFR part 450 (the FTA/FHWA joint planning regulation). This certification is valid for one year.

signature 

name of authorized official 

title 

date 

Existing Paratransit Service Survey 

This is to certify that (name of public entity (ies)) has conducted a survey of existing paratransit services as required by 49 CFR 37.137 (a).

signature 

name of authorized official 

title 

date 

Included Service Certification 

This is to certify that service provided by other entities but included in the ADA paratransit plan submitted by (name of submitting entity (ies)) meets the requirements of 49 CFR part 37, subpart F providing that ADA eligible individuals have access to the service; the service is provided in the manner represented; and, that efforts will be made to coordinate the provision of paratransit service offered by other providers.

signature 

name of authorized official 

title 

date 

Joint Plan Certification I 

This is to certify that (name of entity covered by joint plan) is committed to providing ADA paratransit service as part of this coordinated plan and in conformance with the requirements of 49 CFR part 37, subpart F.

signature 

name of authorized official 

title 

date 

Joint Plan Certification II 

This is to certify that (name of entity covered by joint plan) will, in accordance with 49 CFR 37.141, maintain current levels of paratransit service until the coordinated plan goes into effect.

signature 

name of authorized official 

title 

date 

State Certification that Plans have been Received 

This is to certify that all ADA paratransit plans required under 49 CFR 37.139 have been received by (state DOT)

signature 

name of authorized official 

title 

date 

[56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 79 FR 21406, Apr. 16, 2014] 

Appendix D to Part 37—Construction and Interpretation of Provisions of 49 CFR Part 37

This appendix explains the Department's construction and interpretation of provisions of 49 CFR part 37. It is intended to be used as definitive guidance concerning the meaning and implementation of these provisions. The appendix is organized on a section-by-section basis. Some sections of the rule are not discussed in the appendix, because they are self-explanatory or we do not currently have interpretive material to provide concerning them.

The Department also provides guidance by other means, such as manuals and letters. The Department intends to update this Appendix periodically to include guidance, provided in response to inquiries about specific situations, that is of general relevance or interest.

Amendments to 49 CFR Part 27 

Section 27.67(d) has been revised to reference the Access Board facility guidelines (found in appendix A to part 37) as well as the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standard (UFAS). This change was made to ensure consistency between requirements under section 504 and the ADA. Several caveats relating to the application of UFAS (e.g., that spaces not used by the public or likely to result in the employment of individuals with disabilities would not have to meet the standards) have been deleted. It is the Department's understanding that provisions of the Access Board standards and part 37 make them unnecessary.

The Department is aware that there is a transition period between the publication of this rule and the effective date of many of its provisions (e.g., concerning facilities and paratransit services) during which section 504 remains the basic authority for accessibility modifications. In this interval, the Department expects recipients' compliance with section 504 to look forward to compliance with the ADA provisions. That is, if a recipient is making a decision about the shape of its paratransit service between the publication of this rule and January 26, 1992, the decision should be in the direction of service that will help to comply with post-January 1992 requirements. A recipient that severely curtailed its present paratransit service in October, and then asked for a three- or five-year phase-in of service under its paratransit plan, would not be acting consistent with this policy.

Likewise, the Department would view with disfavor any attempt by a recipient to accelerate the beginning of the construction, installation or alteration of a facility to before January 26, 1992, to “beat the clock” and avoid the application of this rule's facility standards. The Department would be very reluctant to approve grants, contracts, exemption requests etc., that appear to have this effect. The purpose of the Department's administration of section 504 is to ensure compliance with the national policy stated in the ADA, not to permit avoidance of it.

Subpart A—General 

Section 37.3 Definitions 

The definition of “commuter authority” includes a list of commuter rail operators drawn from a statutory reference in the ADA. It should be noted that this list is not exhaustive. Other commuter rail operators (e.g., in Chicago or San Francisco) would also be encompassed by this definition.

The definition of “commuter bus service” is important because the ADA does not require complementary paratransit to be provided with respect to commuter bus service operated by public entities. The rationale that may be inferred for the statutory exemption for this kind of service concerns its typical characteristics (e.g., no attempt to comprehensively cover a service area, limited route structure, limited origins and destinations, interface with another mode of transportation, limited purposes of travel). These characteristics can be found in some transportation systems other than bus systems oriented toward work trips. For example, bus service that is used as a dedicated connecter to commuter or intercity rail service, certain airport shuttles, and university bus systems share many or all of these characteristics. As explained further in the discussion of subpart B, the Department has determined that it is appropriate to cover these services with the requirements applicable to commuter bus systems.

The definitions of “designated public transportation” and “specified public transportation” exclude transportation by aircraft. Persons interested in matters concerning access to air travel for individuals with disabilities should refer to 14 CFR part 382, the Department's regulation implementing the Air Carrier Access Act. Since the facility requirements of this part refer to facilities involved in the provision of designated or specified public transportation, airport facilities are not covered by this part. DOJ makes clear that public and private airport facilities are covered under its title II and title III regulations, respectively.

The examples given in the definition of “facility” all relate to ground transportation. We would point out that, since transportation by passenger vessels is covered by this rule and by DOJ rules, such vessel-related facilities as docks, wharfs, vessel terminals, etc. fall under this definition. It is intended that specific requirements for vessels and related facilities will be set forth in future rulemaking.

The definitions of “fixed route system” and “demand responsive system” derive directly from the ADA's definitions of these terms. Some systems, like a typical city bus system or a dial-a-ride van system, fit clearly into one category or the other. Other systems may not so clearly fall into one of the categories. Nevertheless, because how a system is categorized has consequences for the requirements it must meet, entities must determine, on a case-by-case basis, into which category their systems fall.

In making this determination, one of the key factors to be considered is whether the individual, in order to use the service, must request the service, typically by making a call.

With fixed route service, no action by the individual is needed to initiate public transportation. If an individual is at a bus stop at the time the bus is scheduled to appear, then that individual will be able to access the transportation system. With demand-reponsive service, an additional step must be taken by the individual before he or she can ride the bus, i.e., the individual must make a telephone call.

(S. Rept. 101-116 at 54).

Other factors, such as the presence or absence of published schedules, or the variation of vehicle intervals in anticipation of differences in usage, are less important in making the distinction between the two types of service. If a service is provided along a given route, and a vehicle will arrive at certain times regardless of whether a passenger actively requests the vehicle, the service in most cases should be regarded as fixed route rather than demand responsive.

At the same time, the fact that there is an interaction between a passenger and transportation service does not necessarily make the service demand responsive. For many types of service (e.g., intercity bus, intercity rail) which are clearly fixed route, a passenger has to interact with an agent to buy a ticket. Some services (e.g., certain commuter bus or commuter rail operations) may use flag stops, in which a vehicle along the route does not stop unless a passenger flags the vehicle down. A traveler staying at a hotel usually makes a room reservation before hopping on the hotel shuttle. This kind of interaction does not make an otherwise fixed route service demand responsive.

On the other hand, we would regard a system that permits user-initiated deviations from routes or schedules as demand-responsive. For example, if a rural public transit system (e.g., a recipient of funds under 49 U.S.C. 5311) has a few fixed routes, the fixed route portion of its system would be subject to the requirements of subpart F for complementary paratransit service. If the entity changed its system so that it operated as a route-deviation system, we would regard it as a demand responsive system. Such a system would not be subject to complementary paratransit requirements.

The definition of “individual with a disability” excludes someone who is currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs, when a covered entity is acting on the basis of such use. This concept is more important in employment and public accommodations contexts than it is in transportation, and is discussed at greater length in the DOJ and EEOC rules. Essentially, the definition says that, although drug addiction (i.e., the status or a diagnosis of being a drug abuser) is a disability, no one is regarded as being an individual with a disability on the basis of current illegal drug use.

Moreover, even if an individual has a disability, a covered entity can take action against the individual if that individual is currently engaging in illegal drug use. For example, if a person with a mobility or vision impairment is ADA paratransit eligible, but is caught possessing or using cocaine or marijuana on a paratransit vehicle, the transit provider can deny the individual further eligibility. If the individual has successfully undergone rehabilitation or is no longer using drugs, as explained in the preamble to the DOJ rules, the transit provider could not continue to deny eligibility on the basis that the individual was a former drug user or still was diagnosed as a person with a substance abuse problem.

We defined “paratransit” in order to note its specialized usage in the rule. Part 37 uses this term to refer to the complementary paratransit service comparable to public fixed route systems which must be provided. Typically, paratransit is provided in a demand responsive mode. Obviously, the rule refers to a wide variety of demand responsive services that are not “paratransit,” in this specialized sense.

The ADA's definition of “over-the-road bus” may also be somewhat narrower than the common understanding of the term. The ADA definition focuses on a bus with an elevated passenger deck over a baggage compartment (i.e., a “Greyhound-type” bus). Other types of buses commonly referred to as “over-the-road buses,” which are sometimes used for commuter bus or other service, do not come within this definition. Only buses that do come within the definition are subject to the over-the-road bus exception to accessibility requirements in Title III of the ADA.

For terminological clarity, we want to point out that two different words are used in ADA regulations to refer to devices on which individuals with hearing impairments communicate over telephone lines. DOJ uses the more traditional term “telecommunications device for the deaf” (TDD). The Access Board uses a newer term, “text telephone.” The DOT rule uses the terms interchangably.

A “used vehicle” means a vehicle which has prior use; prior, that is, to its acquisition by its present owner or lessee. The definition is not relevant to existing vehicles in one's own fleet, which were obtained before the ADA vehicle accessibility requirements took effect.

A “vanpool” is a voluntary commuter ridesharing arrangement using a van with a seating capacity of more than seven persons, including the driver. Carpools are not included in the definition. There are some systems using larger vehicles (e.g., buses) that operate, in effect, as vanpools. This definition encompasses such systems. Vanpools are used for daily work trips, between commuters' homes (or collection points near them) and work sites (or drop points near them). Drivers are themselves commuters who are either volunteers who receive no compensation for their efforts or persons who are reimbursed by other riders for the vehicle, operating, and driving costs.

The definition of “wheelchair” includes a wide variety of mobility devices. This inclusiveness is consistent with the legislative history of the ADA (See S. Rept. 101-116 at 48). While some mobility devices may not look like many persons' traditional idea of a wheelchair, three- and more-wheeled devices, of many varied designs, are used by individuals with disabilities and must be transported. “Wheelchair” is defined in this rule as a mobility aid belonging to any class of three-or more-wheeled devices, usable indoors, designed or modified for and used by individuals with mobility impairments, whether operated manually or powered. The “three- or-more-wheeled” language in the definition is intended to encompass wheelchairs that may have additional wheels (e.g., two extra guide wheels in addition to the more traditional four wheels).

Persons with mobility disabilities may use devices other than wheelchairs to assist with locomotion. Canes, crutches, and walkers, for example, are often used by people whose mobility disabilities do not require use of a wheelchair. These devices must be accommodated on the same basis as wheelchairs. However, the Department does not interpret its rules to require transportation providers to accommodate devices that are not primarily designed or intended to assist persons with mobility disabilities (e.g., skateboards, bicycles, shopping carts), apart from general policies applicable to all passengers who might seek to bring such devices into a vehicle. Similarly, the Department does not interpret its rules to require transportation providers to permit an assistive device to be used in a way that departs from or exceeds the intended purpose of the device (e.g., to use a walker, even one with a seat intended to allow temporary rest intervals, as a wheelchair in which a passenger sits for the duration of a ride on a transit vehicle).

The definition of wheelchair is not intended to include a class of devices known as “other power-driven mobility devices” (OPMDs). OPMDs are defined in Department of Justice ADA rules as “any mobility device powered by batteries, fuel, or other engines—whether or not designed primarily for use by individuals with mobility disabilities—that is used by individuals with mobility disabilities for the purpose of locomotion, including golf carts * * * Segway[s]®, or any mobility device designed to operate in areas without defined pedestrian routes, but that is not a wheelchair * * * .” DOT is placing guidance on its Web site concerning the use of Segways in transportation vehicles and facilities.

The definition of “direct threat” is intended to be interpreted consistently with the parallel definition in Department of Justice regulations. That is, part 37 does not require a public entity to permit an individual to participate in or benefit from the services, programs, or activities of that public entity when that individual poses a direct threat to the health or safety of others. In determining whether an individual poses a direct threat to the health or safety of others, a public entity must make an individualized assessment, based on reasonable judgment that relies on current medical knowledge or on the best available objective evidence, to ascertain: the nature, duration, and severity of the risk; the probability that the potential injury will actually occur; and whether reasonable modifications of policies, practices, or procedures or the provision of auxiliary aids or services will mitigate the risk.

Section 37.5 Nondiscrimination 

This section states the general nondiscrimination obligation for entities providing transportation service. It should be noted that virtually all public and private entities covered by this regulation are also covered by DOJ regulations, which have more detailed statements of general nondiscrimination obligations.

Under the ADA, an entity may not consign an individual with disabilities to a separate, “segregated,” service for such persons, if the individual can in fact use the service for the general public. This is true even if the individual takes longer, or has more difficulty, than other persons in using the service for the general public.

One instance in which this principal applies concerns the use of designated priority seats (e.g., the so-called “elderly and handicapped” seats near the entrances to buses). A person with a disability (e.g., a visual impairment) may choose to take advantage of this accommodation or not. If not, it is contrary to rule for the entity to insist that the individual must sit in the priority seats.

The prohibition on special charges applies to charges for service to individuals with disabilities that are higher than charges for the same or comparable services to other persons. For example, if a shuttle service charges $20.00 for a ride from a given location to the airport for most people, it could not charge $40.00 because the passenger had a disability or needed to use the shuttle service's lift-equipped van. Higher mileage charges for using an accessible vehicle would likewise be inconsistent with the rule. So would charging extra to carry a service animal accompanying an individual with a disability.

If a taxi company charges $1.00 to stow luggage in the trunk, it cannot charge $2.00 to stow a folding wheelchair there. This provision does not mean, however, that a transportation provider cannot charge nondiscriminatory fees to passengers with disabilities. The taxi company in the above example can charge a passenger $1.00 to stow a wheelchair in the trunk; it is not required to waive the charge. This section does not prohibit the fares for paratransit service which transit providers are allowed to charge under § 37.131(d).

A requirement for an attendant is inconsistent with the general nondiscrimination principle that prohibits policies that unnecessarily impose requirements on individuals with disabilities that are not imposed on others. Consequently, such requirements are prohibited. An entity is not required to provide attendant services (e.g., assistance in toileting, feeding, dressing), etc.

This provision must also be considered in light of the fact that an entity may refuse service to someone who engages in violent, seriously disruptive, or illegal conduct. If an entity may legitimately refuse service to someone, it may condition service to him on actions that would mitigate the problem. The entity could require an attendant as a condition of providing service it otherwise had the right to refuse.

The rule also points out that involuntary conduct related to a disability that may offend or annoy other persons, but which does not pose a direct threat, is not a basis for refusal of transportation. For example, some persons with Tourette's syndrome may make involuntary profane exclamations. These may be very annoying or offensive to others, but would not be a ground for denial of service. Nor would it be consistent with the nondiscrimination requirements of this part to deny service based on fear or misinformation about the disability. For example, a transit provider could not deny service to a person with HIV disease because its personnel or other passengers are afraid of being near people with that condition.

This section also prohibits denials of service or the placing on services of conditions inconsistent with this part on individuals with disabilities because of insurance company policies or requirements. If an insurance company told a transit provider that it would withdraw coverage, or raise rates, unless a transit provider refused to carry persons with disabilities, or unless the provider refused to carry three-wheeled scooters, this would not excuse the provider from providing the service as mandate by this part. This is not a regulatory requirement on insurance companies, but simply says that covered entities must comply with this part, even in the face of difficulties with their insurance companies.

Section 37.7 Standards for Accessible Vehicles 

This section makes clear that, in order to meet accessibility requirements of this rule, vehicles must comply with Access Board standards, incorporated in DOT rules as 49 CFR part 38. Paragraph (b) of § 37.7 spells out a procedure by which an entity (public or private) can deviate from provisions of part 38 with respect to vehicles. The entity would have to describe how its alternative mode of compliance would meet or exceed the level of access to or usability of the vehicle that compliance with part 38 would otherwise provide.

It should be noted that equivalent facilitation does not provide a means to get a waiver of accessibility requirements. Rather, it is a way in which comparable (not a lesser degree of) accessibility can be provided by other means. The entity must consult with the public through some means of public participation in devising its alternative form of compliance, and the public input must be reflected in the submission to the Administrator (or the Federal Railroad Administrator in appropriate cases, such as a request concerning Amtrak). The Administrator will make a case-by-case decision about whether compliance with part 38 was achievable and, if not, whether the proffered alternative complies with the equivalent facilitation standard. DOT intends to consult with the Access Board in making these determinations.

This equivalent facilitation provision can apply to buses or other motor vehicles as well as to rail cars and vehicles. An example of what could be an equivalent facilitation would concern rail cars which would leave too wide a horizontal gap between the door and the platform. If the operator used a combination of bridgeplates and personnel to bridge the gap, it might be regarded as an equivalent facilitation in appropriate circumstances.

Section 37.7(c) clarifies which specifications must be complied with for over-the-road buses purchased by public entities (under subpart D of part 37) or private entities standing in the shoes of the public entity (as described in § 37.23 of part 37). This section is necessary to make clear that over-the-road coaches must be accessible, when they are purchased by or in furtherance of a contract with a public entity. While the October 4, 1990 rule specified that over-the-road coaches must be accessible under these circumstances, we had not previously specified what constitutes accessibility.

Accordingly, this paragraph specifies that an over-the-road bus must have a lift which meets the performance requirements of a regular bus lift (see § 38.23) and must meet the interim accessibility features specified for all over-the-road buses in part 3, subpart G.

Section 37.9 Standards for Transportation Facilities 

This section makes clear that, in order to meet accessibility requirements of this rule, vehicles must comply with appendix A to part 37, which incorporates the Access Board facility guidelines.

Paragraph (b) of § 37.9 provides that, under certain circumstances, existing accessibility modifications to key station facilities do not need to be modified further in order to conform to appendix A. This is true even if the standards under which the facility was modified differ from the Access Board guidelines or provide a lesser standard of accessibility.

To qualify for this “grandfathering,” alterations must have been before January 26, 1992. As in other facility sections of the rule, an alteration is deemed to begin with the issuance of a notice to proceed or work order. The existing modifications must conform to ANSI A-117.1, Specifications for Making Buildings and Facilities Accessible to and Usable by the Physically Handicapped 1980, or the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standard. (UFAS).

For example, if an entity used a Federal grant or loan or money to make changes to a building, it would already have had to comply with the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards. Likewise, if a private entity, acting without any Federal money in the project, may have complied with the ANSI A117.1 standard. So long as the work was done in conformity with the standard that was in effect when the work was done, the alteration will be considered accessible.

However, because one modification was made to a facility under one of these standards, the entity still has a responsibility to make other modifications needed to comply with applicable accessibility requirements. For example, if an entity has made some modifications to a key station according to one of these older standards, but the modifications do not make the key station entirely accessible as this rule requires, then additional modifications would have to be made according to the standards of appendix A. Suppose this entity has put an elevator into the station to make it accessible to individuals who use wheelchairs. If the elevator does not fully meet appendix A standards, but met the applicable ANSI standard when it was installed, it would not need further modifications now. But if it had not already done so, the entity would have to install a tactile strip along the platform edge in order to make the key station fully accessible as provided in this rule. The tactile strip would have to meet appendix A requirements.

The rule specifically provides that “grandfathering” applies only to alterations of individual elements and spaces and only to the extent that provisions covering those elements or spaces are found in UFAS or AHSI A117.1. For example, alterations to the telephones in a key station may have been carried out in order to lower them to meet the requirements of UFAS, but telecommunications devices for the deaf (TDDs) were not installed. (Neither UFAS nor the ANSI standard include requirements concerning TDDs). However, because appendix A does contain TDD requirements, the key station must now be altered in accordance with the standards for TDDs. Similarly, earlier alteration of an entire station in accordance with UFAS or the ANSI standard would not relieve an entity from compliance with any applicable provision concerning the gap between the platform between the platform and the vehicle in a key station, because neither of these two standards addresses the interface between vehicle and platform.

One further clarification concerning the implication of this provision deals with a bus loading island at which buses pull up on both sides of the island. It would be possible to read the bus pad specification to require the island to be a minimum of 84 inches wide (two widths of a bus stop pad), so that a lift could be deployed from buses on both sides of the island at the same time. A double-wide bus pad, however, is likely to exceed available space in most instances.

Where there is space, of course, building a double-wide pad is one acceptable option under this rule. However, the combination of a pad of normal width and standard operational practices may also suffice. (Such practices could be offered as an equivalent facilitation.) For example, buses on either side of the island could stop at staggered locations (i.e., the bus on the left side could stop several feet ahead of the bus on the right side), so that even when buses were on both sides of the island at once, their lifts could be deployed without conflict. Where it is possible, building the pad a little longer than normal size could facilitate such an approach. In a situation where staggered stop areas are not feasible, an operational practice of having one bus wait until the other's lift cycle had been completed could do the job. Finally, the specification does not require that a pad be built at all. If there is nothing that can be done to permit lift deployment on both sides of an island, the buses can stop on the street, or some other location, so long as the lift is deployable.

Like § 37.7, this section contains a provision allowing an entity to request approval for providing accessibility through an equivalent facilitation.

Section 37.11 Administrative Enforcement 

This section spells out administrative means of enforcing the requirements of the ADA. Recipients of Federal financial assistance from DOT (whether public or private entities) are subject to DOT's section 504 enforcement procedures. The existing procedures, including administrative complaints to the DOT Office of Civil Rights, investigation, attempts at conciliation, and final resort to proceedings to cut off funds to a noncomplying recipient, will continue to be used.

In considering enforcement matters, the Department is guided by a policy that emphasizes compliance. The aim of enforcement action, as we see it, is to make sure that entities meet their obligations, not to impose sanctions for their own sake. The Department's enforcement priority is on failures to comply with basic requirements and “pattern or practice” kinds of problems, rather than on isolated operational errors.

Under the DOJ rules implementing title II of the ADA (28 CFR part 35), DOT is a “designated agency” for enforcement of complaints relating to transportation programs of public entities, even if they do not receive Federal financial assistance. When it receives such a complaint, the Department will investigate the complaint, attempt conciliation and, if conciliation is not possible, take action under section 504 and/or refer the matter to the DOJ for possible further action.

Title III of the ADA does not give DOT any administrative enforcement authority with respect to private entities whose transportation services are subject to part 37. In its title III rule (28 CFR part 36), DOJ assumes enforcement responsibility for all title III matters. If the Department of Transportation receives complaints of violations of part 37 by private entities, it will refer the matters to the DOJ.

It should be pointed out that the ADA includes other enforcement options. Individuals have a private right of action against entities who violate the ADA and its implementing regulations. The DOJ can take violators to court. These approaches are not mutually exclusive with the administrative enforcement mechanisms described in this section. An aggrieved individual can complain to DOT about an alleged transportation violation and go to court at the same time. Use of administrative enforcement procedures is not, under titles II and III, an administrative remedy that individuals must exhaust before taking legal action.

We also would point out that the ADA does not assert any blanket preemptive authority over state or local nondiscrimination laws and enforcement mechanisms. While requirements of the ADA and this regulation would preempt conflicting state or local provisions (e.g., a building code or zoning ordinance that prevents compliance with appendix A or other facility accessibility requirements, a provision of local law that said bus drivers could not leave their seats to help secure wheelchair users), the ADA and this rule do not prohibit states and localities from legislating in areas relating to disability. For example, if a state law requires a higher degree of service than the ADA, that requirement could still be enforced. Also, states and localities may continue to enforce their own parallel requirements. For example, it would be a violation of this rule for a taxi driver to refuse to pick up a person based on that person's disability. Such a refusal may also be a violation of a county's taxi rules, subjecting the violator to a fine or suspension of operating privileges. Both ADA and local remedies could proceed in such a case.

Labor-management agreements cannot stand in conflict with the requirements of the ADA and this rule. For example, if a labor-management agreement provides that vehicle drivers are not required to provide assistance to persons with disabilities in a situation in which this rule requires such assistance, then the assistance must be provided notwithstanding the agreement. Labor and management do not have the authority to agree to violate requirements of Federal law.

Section 37.13 Effective Date for Certain Vehicle Lift Specifications. 

This section contains an explicit statement of the effective date for vehicle lift platform specifications. The Department has decided to apply the new part 38 lift platform specifications to solicitations after January 25, 1992. As in the October 4, 1990, rule implementing the acquisition requirements; the date of a solicitation is deemed to be the closing date for the submission of bids or offers in a procurement.

Subpart B—Applicability 

Section 37.21 Applicability—General 

This section emphasizes the broad applicability of part 37. Unlike section 504, the ADA and its implementing rules apply to entities whether or not they receive Federal financial assistance. They apply to private and public entities alike. For entities which do receive Federal funds, compliance with the ADA and part 37 is a condition of compliance with section 504 and 49 CFR part 27, DOT's section 504 rule.

Virtually all entities covered by this rule also are covered by DOJ rules, either under 28 CFR part 36 as state and local program providers or under 28 CFR part 35 as operators of places of public accommodation. Both sets of rules apply; one does not override the other. The DOT rules apply only to the entity's transportation facilities, vehicles, or services; the DOJ rules may cover the entity's activities more broadly. For example, if a public entity operates a transit system and a zoo, DOT's coverage would stop at the transit system's edge, while DOJ's rule would cover the zoo as well.

DOT and DOJ have coordinated their rules, and the rules have been drafted to be consistent with one another. Should, in the context of some future situation, there be an apparent inconsistency between the two rules, the DOT rule would control within the sphere of transportation services, facilities and vehicles.

Section 37.23 Service Under Contract 

This section requires private entities to “stand in the shoes” of public entities with whom they contract to provide transportation services. It ensures that, while a public entity may contract out its service, it may not contract away its ADA responsibilities. The requirement applies primarily to vehicle acquisition requirements and to service provision requirements.

If a public entity wishes to acquire vehicles for use on a commuter route, for example, it must acquire accessible vehicles. It may acquire accessible over-the-road buses, it may acquire accessible full-size transit buses, it may acquire accessible smaller buses, or it may acquire accessible vans. It does not matter what kind of vehicles it acquires, so long as they are accessible. On the other hand, if the public entity wants to use inaccessible buses in its existing fleet for the commuter service, it may do so. All replacement vehicles acquired in the future must, of course, be accessible.

Under this provision, a private entity which contracts to provide this commuter service stands in the shoes of the public entity and is subject to precisely the same requirements (it is not required to do more than the public entity). If the private entity acquires vehicles used to provide the service, the vehicles must be accessible. If it cannot, or chooses not to, acquire an accessible vehicle of one type, it can acquire an accessible vehicle of another type. Like the public entity, it can provide the service with inaccessible vehicles in its existing fleet.

The import of the provision is that it requires a private entity contracting to provide transportation service to a public entity to follow the rules applicable to the public entity. For the time being, a private entity operating in its own right can purchase a new over-the-road bus inaccessible to individuals who use wheelchairs. When that private entity operates service under contract to the public entity, however, it is just as obligated as the public entity itself to purchase an accessible bus for use in that service, whether or not it is an over-the-road bus.

The “stand in the shoes” requirement applies not only to vehicles acquired by private entities explicitly under terms of an executed contract to provide service to a public entity, but also to vehicles acquired “in contemplation of use” for service under such a contract. This language is included to ensure good faith compliance with accessibility requirements for vehicles acquired before the execution of a contract. Whether a particular acquisition is in contemplation of use on a contract will be determined on a case-by-case basis. However, acquiring a vehicle a short time before a contract is executed and then using it for the contracted service is an indication that the vehicle was acquired in contemplation of use on the contract, as is acquiring a vehicle obstensibly for other service provided by the entity and then regularly rotating it into service under the contract.

The “stand in the shoes” requirement is applicable only to the vehicles and service (public entity service requirements, like § 37.163, apply to a private entity in these situations) provided under contract to a public entity. Public entity requirements clearly do not apply to all phases of a private entity's operations, just because it has a contract with a public entity. For example, a private bus company, if purchasing buses for service under contract to a public entity, must purchase accessible buses. The same company, to the extent permitted by the private entity provisions of this part, may purchase inaccessible vehicles for its tour bus operations.

The Department also notes that the “stands in the shoes” requirement may differ depending on the kind of service involved. The public entity's “shoes” are shaped differently, for example, depending on whether the public entity is providing fixed route or demand responsive service to the general public. In the case of demand responsive service, a public entity is not required to buy an accessible vehicle if its demand responsive system, when viewed in its entirety, provides service to individuals with disabilities equivalent to its service to other persons. A private contractor providing a portion of this paratransit service would not necessarily have to acquire an accessible vehicle if this equivalency test is being met by the system as a whole. Similarly, a public entity can, after going through a “good faith efforts” search, acquire inaccessible buses. A private entity under contract to the public can do the same. “Stand in the shoes” may also mean that, under some circumstances, a private contractor need not acquire accessible vehicles. If a private company contracts with a public school district to provide school bus service, it is covered, for that purpose, by the exemption for public school transportation.

In addition, the requirement that a private entity play by the rules applicable to a public entity can apply in situations involving an “arrangement or other relationship” with a public entity other than the traditional contract for service. For example, a private utility company that operates what is, in essence, a regular fixed route public transportation system for a city, and which receives funding under 49 U.S.C. 5307 or 49 U.S.C. 5309 via an agreement with a state or local government agency, would fall under the provisions of this section. The provider would have to comply with the vehicle acquisition, paratransit, and service requirements that would apply to the public entity through which it receives the FTA funds, if that public entity operated the system itself. The Department would not, however, construe this section to apply to situations in which the degree of FTA funding and state and local agency involvement is considerably less, or in which the system of transportation involved is not a de facto surrogate for a traditional public entity fixed route transit system serving a city (e.g., a private non-profit social service agency which receives funds under 49 U.S.C. 5310 to purchase a vehicle).

This section also requires that a public entity not diminish the percentage of accessible vehicles in its fleet through contracting. For example, suppose a public entity has 100 buses in its fleet, of which 20 are accessible, meaning that 20 percent of its fleet is accessible. The entity decides to add a fixed route, for which a contractor is engaged. The contractor is supplying ten of its existing inaccessible buses for the fixed route. To maintain the 20 percent accessibility ratio, there would have to be 22 accessible buses out of the 110 buses now in operation in carrying out the public entity's service. The public entity could maintain its 20 percent level of accessibility through any one or more of a number of means, such as having the contractor to provide two accessible buses, retrofitting two if its own existing buses, or accelerating replacement of two of its own inaccessible buses with accessible buses.

This rule applies the “stand in the shoes” principle to transactions wholly among private entities as well. For example, suppose a taxi company (a private entity primarily engaged in the business of transporting people) contracts with a hotel to provide airport shuttle van service. With respect to that service, the taxi company would be subject to the requirements for private entities not primarily in the business of transporting people, since it would be “standing in the shoes” of the hotel for that purpose.

Section 37.25 University Transportation Systems 

Private university-operated transportation systems are subject to the requirements of this rule for private entities not primarily engaged in the business of transporting people. With one important exception, public university-operated transportation systems are subject to the requirements of the rule for public entities. The nature of the systems involved—demand-responsive or fixed route—determines the precise requirements involved.

For public university fixed route systems, public entity requirements apply. In the case of fixed route systems, the requirements for commuter bus service would govern. This has the effect of requiring the acquisition of accessible vehicles and compliance with most other provisions of the rule, but does not require the provision of complementary paratransit or submitting a paratransit plan. As a result, private and public universities will have very similar obligations under the rule.

Section 37.27 Transportation for Elementary and Secondary Education Systems 

This section restates the statutory exemption from public entity requirements given to public school transportation. This extension also applies to transportation of pre-school children to Head Start or special education programs which receive Federal assistance. It also applies to arrangements permitting pre-school children of school bus drivers to ride a school bus or allowing teenage mothers to be transported to day care facilities at a school or along a school bus route so that their mothers may continue to attend school (See H. Rept. 101-485, pt. 1 at 27). The situation for private schools is more complex. According to the provision, a private elementary or secondary school's transportation system is exempt from coverage under this rule if all three of the following conditions are met: (1) The school receives Federal financial assistance; (2) the school is subject to section 504; and (3) the school's transportation system provides transportation services to individuals with disabilities, including wheelchair users, equivalent to those provided to individuals without disabilities. The test of equivalency is the same as that for other private entities, and is described under § 37.105. If the school does not meet all these criteria, then it is subject to the requirements of Part 37 for private entities not primarily engaged in the business of transporting people.

The Department notes that, given the constitutional law on church-state separation, it is likely that church-affiliated private schools do not receive Federal financial assistance. To the extent that these schools' transportation systems are operated by religious entities or entities controlled by religious organizations, they are not subject to the ADA at all, so this section does not apply to them.

Section 37.29 Private Providers of Taxi Service 

This section first recites that providers of taxi service are private entities primarily engaged in the business of transporting people which provide demand responsive service. For purposes of this section, other transportation services that involve calling for a car and a driver to take one places (e.g., limousine services, of the kind that provide luxury cars and chauffeurs for senior proms and analogous adult events) are regarded as taxi services.

Under the ADA, no private entity is required to purchase an accessible automobile. If a taxi company purchases a larger vehicle, like a van, it is subject to the same rules as any other private entity primarily engaged in the business of transporting people which operates a demand responsive service. That is, unless it is already providing equivalent service, any van it acquires must be accessible. Equivalent service is measured according to the criteria of § 37.105. Taxi companies are not required to acquire vehicles other than automobiles to add accessible vehicles to their fleets.

Taxi companies are subject to nondiscrimination obligations. These obligations mean, first, that a taxi service may not deny a ride to an individual with a disability who is capable of using the taxi vehicles. It would be discrimination to pass up a passenger because he or she was blind or used a wheelchair, if the wheelchair was one that could be stowed in the cab and the passenger could transfer to a vehicle seat. Nor could a taxi company insist that a wheelchair user wait for a lift-equipped van if the person could use an automobile.

It would be discrimination for a driver to refuse to assist with stowing a wheelchair in the trunk (since taxi drivers routinely assist passengers with stowing luggage). It would be discrimination to charge a higher fee or fare for carrying a person with a disability than for carrying a non-disabled passenger, or a higher fee for stowing a wheelchair than for stowing a suitcase. (Charging the same fee for stowing a wheelchair as for stowing a suitcase would be proper, however.) The fact that it may take somewhat more time and effort to serve a person with a disability than another passenger does not justify discriminatory conduct with respect to passengers with disabilities.

State or local governments may run user-side subsidy arrangements for the general public (e.g., taxi voucher systems for senior citizens or low-income persons). Under the DOJ title II rule, these programs would have to meet “program accessibility” requirements, which probably would require that accessible transportation be made available to senior citizens or low-income persons with disabilities. This would not directly require private taxi providers who accept the vouchers to purchase accessible vehicles beyond the requirements of this rule, however.

Section 37.31 Vanpools 

This provision applies to public vanpool systems the requirements for public entities operating demand responsive systems for the general public. A public vanpool system is one operated by a public entity, or in which a public entity owns or purchases or leases the vehicles. Lesser degrees of public involvement with an otherwise private ridesharing arrangement (e.g., provision of parking spaces, HOV lanes, coordination or clearinghouse services) do not convert a private into a public system.

The requirement for a public vanpool system is that it purchase or lease an accessible vehicle unless it can demonstrate that it provides equivalent service to individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, as it provides to individuals without disabilities. For a public vanpool system, the equivalency requirement would be met if an accessible vehicle is made available to and used by a vanpool when an individual with a disability needs such a vehicle to participate. Public vanpool systems may meet this requirement through obtaining a percentage of accessible vehicles that is reasonable in light of demand for them by participants, but this is not required, so long as the entity can respond promptly to requests for participation in a vanpool with the provision of an accessible van when needed.

There is no requirement for private vanpools, defined as a voluntary arrangement in which the driver is compensated only for expenses.

Section 37.33 Airport Transportation Systems 

Fixed route transportation systems operated by public airports are regarded by this section as fixed route commuter bus systems. As such, shuttles among terminals and parking lots, connector systems among the airport and a limited number of other local destinations must acquire accessible buses, but are not subject to complementary paratransit requirements. (If a public airport operates a demand responsive system for the general public, it would be subject to the rules for demand responsive systems for the general public.)

It should be noted that this section applies only to transportation services that are operated by public airports themselves (or by private contractors who stand in their shoes). When a regular urban mass transit system serves the airport, the airport is simply one portion of its service area, treated for purposes of this rule like the rest of its service area.

Virtually all airports are served by taxi companies, who are subject to § 37.29 at airports as elsewhere. In addition, many airports are served by jitney or shuttle systems. Typically, these systems operate in a route-deviation or similar variable mode in which there are passenger-initiated decisions concerning destinations. We view such systems as demand responsive transportation operated by private entities primarily engaged in the business of transporting people.

Since many of these operators are small businesses, it may be difficult for them to meet equivalency requirements on their own without eventually having all or nearly all accessible vehicles, which could pose economic problems. One suggested solution to this problem is for the operators serving a given airport to form a pool or consortium arrangement, in which a number of shared accessible vehicles would meet the transportations of individuals with disabilities. As in other forms of transportation, such an arrangement would have to provide service in a nondiscriminatory way (e.g., in an integrated setting, no higher fares for accessible service).

Section 37.35 Supplemental Service for Other Transportation Modes 

This section applies to a number of situations in which an operator of another transportation mode uses bus or other service to connect its service with limited other points.

One instance is when an intercity railroad route is set up such that the train stops outside the major urban center which is the actual destination for many passengers. Examples mentioned to us include bus service run by Amtrak from a stop in Columbus, Wisconsin, to downtown Madison, or from San Jose to San Francisco. Such service is fixed route, from the train station to a few points in the metropolitan area, with a schedule keyed to the train schedule. It would be regarded as commuter bus service, meaning that accessible vehicles would have to be acquired but complementary paratransit was not required.

Another instance is one in which a commuter rail operator uses fixed route bus service as a dedicated connection to, or extension of, its rail service. The service may go to park and ride lots or other destinations beyond the vicinity of the rail line. Again, this service shares the characteristics of commuter bus service that might be used even if the rail line were not present, and does not attempt to be a comprehensive mass transit bus service for the area.

Of course, there may be instances in which a rail operator uses demand responsive instead of fixed route service for a purpose of this kind. In that case, the demand responsive system requirements of the rule would apply.

Private entities (i.e., those operating places of public accommodation) may operate similar systems, as when a cruise ship operator provides a shuttle or connector between an airport and the dock. This service is covered by the rules governing private entities not primarily engaged in the business of transporting people. Fixed route or demand responsive rules apply, depending on the characteristics of the system involved.

One situation not explicitly covered in this section concerns ad hoc transportation arranged, for instance, by a rail operator when the train does not wind up at its intended destination. For example, an Amtrak train bound for Philadelphia may be halted at Wilmington by a track blockage between the two cities. Usually, the carrier responds by providing bus service to the scheduled destination or to the next point where rail service can resume.

The service that the carrier provides in this situation is essentially a continuation by other means of its primary service. We view the obligation of the rail operator as being to ensure that all passengers, including individuals with disabilities, are provided service to the destination in a nondiscriminatory manner. This includes, for instance, providing service in the most integrated setting appropriate to the needs of the individual and service that gets a passenger with a disability to the destination as soon as other passengers.

Section 37.37 Other Applications 

The ADA specifically defines “public entity.” Anything else is a “private entity.” The statute does not include in this definition a private entity that receives a subsidy or franchise from a state or local government or is regulated by a public entity. Only through the definition of “operates” (see discussion of § 37.23) do private entities' relationships to public entities subject private entities to the requirements for public entities. Consequently, in deciding which provisions of the rule to apply to an entity in other than situations covered by § 37.23, the nature of the entity—public or private—is determinative.

Transportation service provided by public accommodations is viewed as being provided by private entities not primarily engaged in the business of transporting people. Either the provisions of this part applicable to demand responsive or fixed route systems apply, depending on the nature of a specific system at a specific location. The distinction between fixed route and demand responsive systems is discussed in connection with the definitions section above. It is the responsibility of each private entity, in the first instance, to assess the nature of each transportation system on a case-by-case basis and determine the applicable rules.

On the other hand, conveyances used for recreational purposes, such as amusement park rides, ski lifts, or historic rail cars or trolleys operated in museum settings, are not viewed as transportation under this rule at all. Other conveyances may fit into this category as well.

The criterion for determining what requirements apply is whether the conveyances are primarily an aspect of the recreational experience itself or a means of getting from Point A to Point B. At a theme park, for instance, a large roller coaster (though a “train” of cars on a track) is a public accommodation not subject to this rule; the tram that transports the paying customers around the park, with a stop at the roller coaster, is a transportation system subject to the “private, not primarily” provisions of this part.

Employer-provided transportation for employees is not covered by this part, but by EEOC rules under title I of the ADA. (Public entities are also subject to DOJ's title II rules with respect to employment.) This exclusion from part 37 applies to transportation services provided by an employer (whether access to motor pool vehicles, parking shuttles, employer-sponsored van pools) that is made available solely to its own employees. If an employer provides service to its own employees and other persons, such as workers of other employers or customers, it would be subject to the requirements of this part from private entities not primarily engaged in the business of transporting people or public entities, as applicable.

The rule looks to the private entity actually providing the transportation service in question in determining whether the “private, primarily” or “private, not primarily” rules apply. For example, Conglomerate, Inc., owns a variety of agribusiness, petrochemical, weapons system production, and fast food corporations. One of its many subsidiaries, Green Tours, Inc., provides charter bus service for people who want to view national parks, old-growth forests, and other environmentally significant places. It is probably impossible to say in what business Conglomerate, Inc. is primarily engaged, but it clearly is not transporting people. Green Tours, Inc., on the other hand, is clearly primarily engaged in the business of transporting people, and the rule treats it as such.

On the other hand, when operating a transportation service off to the side of to the main business of a public accommodation (e.g., a hotel shuttle), the entity as a whole would be considered. Even if some dedicated employees are used to provide the service, shuttles and other systems provided as a means of getting to, from, or around a public accommodation remain solidly in the “private, not primarily” category.

Subpart C—Transportation Facilities 

Section 37.41 Construction of Transportation Facilities by Public Entities 

Section 37.41 contains the general requirement that all new facilities constructed after January 25, 1992, be accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. This provision tracks the statute closely, and is analogous to a provision in the DOJ regulations for private entities. Section 226 of the ADA provides little discretion in this requirement.

The requirement is keyed to construction which “begins” after January 25, 1992. The regulation defines “begin” to mean when a notice to proceed order has been issued. This term has a standard meaning in the construction industry, as an instruction to the contractor to proceed with the work.

Questions have been raised concerning which standards apply before January 26, 1992. There are Federal requirements that apply to all recipients of federal money, depending on the circumstances.

First, if an entity is a Federal recipient and uses Federal dollars to construct the facility, regulations implementing section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), require the recipient to comply with the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.

Second, since the Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987 (Pub. L. 100-259), an operation of a recipient of federal funds would also have to comply with section 504, even though the activity was not paid for with Federal funds. Thus, the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards would apply to this construction as well.

As mentioned above, the Department intends, in the period before January 26, 1991, to view compliance with section 504 in light of compliance with ADA requirements (this point applies to alterations as well as new construction). Consequently, in reviewing requests for grants, contract approvals, exemptions, etc., (whether with respect to ongoing projects or new, experimental, or one-time efforts), the Department will, as a policy matter, seek to ensure compliance with ADA standards.

Section 37.42 

Service in an integrated setting to passengers at intercity, commuter, and high-speed rail station platforms constructed or altered after February 1, 2012.

Individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, must have access to all accessible cars in each train using a new or altered station. This performance standard will apply at stations where construction or alteration of platforms begins 135 days or more after the rule is published. The performance standard does not require rail operators to retrofit existing station platforms or cars. The requirement is prospective, and section 37.42 does not require retrofit of existing stations (though compliance with existing disability nondiscrimination requirements not being altered is still required). To meet this performance standard on lines or systems where track passing through stations and adjacent to platforms is shared with existing freight rail operations, passenger railroads that do not choose to provide level-entry boarding may, after obtaining FRA and/or FTA approval, use car-borne lifts, ramps or other devices, mini-high platforms (making multiple stops where necessary to accommodate passengers wishing to use different cars of the train), or movable station-based lifts.

On commuter, intercity, or high-speed rail lines or systems in which track passing through stations and adjacent to platforms is not shared with existing freight rail operations, the performance standard must be met by providing level-entry boarding to all accessible cars in each train that serves new or altered stations on the line or system. For example, if a new commuter or high-speed rail line or system is being built, and the track adjacent to platforms is not shared with freight traffic (e.g., it is a passenger rail-only system, or a passing or gauntlet track exists for freight traffic), then the stations would have to provide level-entry boarding. Other options would not be permitted.

If a platform being constructed or altered is not adjacent to track used for freight, but the track and platform are used by more than one passenger railroad (e.g., Amtrak and a commuter railroad), the possibility of the platform serving cars with different door heights exists. In this situation, the level-entry boarding requirement continues to exist. Generally, the platform should be level with respect to the system that has the lower boarding height. This is because it is not good safety practice to make passengers step down (or be lifted down or use ramps to get down) to board a train. For example, if Amtrak operates through a station with cars that are 15 inches ATR, and a commuter railroad uses the same platform with cars that are 25 inches ATR, the platform would be level with respect to the Amtrak cars. The commuter railroad would have to provide another means of access, such as lifts. In all such cases where mixed rail equipment will be used, the rule requires that both FRA and FTA be consulted by the railroads involved. As in other cases where level-entry boarding is not used, the railroad must obtain FTA and/or FRA approval for the means the railroad wants to use to meet the performance standard.

The details of the “track passing through stations and adjacent to platforms is shared with existing freight rail operations” language are important. There may be stations that serve lines that are shared, at some points, by passenger and freight traffic, but where the freight traffic does not go through the particular station (e.g., because freight traffic bypasses the station), level-entry boarding is required. There could also be situations on which multiple tracks pass through a station, and freight traffic uses only a center track, not a track which is adjacent to a platform. In such cases, the new or altered platform would have to provide level-entry boarding. It is important to note that this language refers to “existing” freight rail traffic, as opposed to the possibility that freight traffic might use the track in question at some future time. Likewise, if freight trains have not used a track passing through a station in a significant period of time (e.g., the past 10 years), the Department does not view this as constituting “existing freight rail traffic.”

Passenger rail operators must provide access only to accessible, available cars that people with disabilities are trying to access at a given station. If a train has eight accessible cars, and wheelchair users want to enter only cars 2 and 7 (see discussion below of passenger notification), then railroad personnel need to deploy lifts or bridge plates only at cars 2 and 7, not at the other cars. Similarly, the rule requires operators to provide access only to available cars at a station. If a train has eight accessible cars, but the platform only serves cars 1 through 6, then railroad personnel need to deploy lifts or bridge plates only at cars that people with disabilities are trying to access and that are available to all passengers. We would also point out that wheelchair positions on rail passenger cars are intended to serve wheelchair users, and railroad operators should take steps to ensure that these spaces are available for wheelchair users and not for other uses. For example, it would be contrary to the rule for a wheelchair user to be told that he or she could not use car 7 because the wheelchair spaces were filled with other passengers' luggage from a previous stop.

In order to ensure that access was provided, passengers would have to notify railroad personnel. For example, if a passenger at a station wanted to use a station-based lift to access car 6, the passenger would request the use of car 6 and railroad personnel would deploy the lift at that car. Likewise, at a station using a mini-high platform, a passenger on this platform would inform train personnel that he or she wanted to enter car 5, whereupon the train would pull forward so that car 5 was opposite the mini-high platform. We contemplate that these requests would be made when the train arrives, and railroads could not insist on advance notice (e.g., the railroad could not require a passenger to call a certain time in advance to make a “reservation” to use a lift to get on a particular car). As part of its submission to FTA or FRA, the railroad would describe the procedure it would use to receive and fulfill these requests.

Where a railroad operator wishes to provide access to its rail cars through a means other than level-entry boarding, it is essential that it provide an integrated, safe, timely, reliable, and effective means of access for people with disabilities. A railroad is not required to choose what might be regarded as a more desirable or convenient method over a less desirable or convenient method, or to choose a more costly option over a less costly option. What a railroad must do is to ensure that whatever option it chooses works. However, to assist railroads in choosing the most suitable option, the rule requires that a railroad not using level-entry boarding, if it chooses an approach other than the use of car-borne lifts, must perform a comparison of the costs (capital, operating, and life-cycle costs) of car-borne lifts versus the means preferred by the railroad operator, as well as a comparison of the relative ability of each of the two alternatives (i.e., car-borne lifts and the railroad's preferred approach) to provide service to people with disabilities in an integrated, safe, reliable, and timely manner. The railroad must submit this comparison to FTA and FRA at the same time as it submits its plan to FRA and/or FTA, as described below, although the comparison is not part of the basis on which the agencies would determine whether the plan meets the performance standard. The Department believes that, in creating this plan, railroads should consult with interested individuals and groups and should make the plan readily available to the public, including individuals with disabilities.

To ensure that the railroad's chosen option works, the railroad must provide to FRA or FTA (or both), as applicable, a plan explaining how its preferred method will provide the required integrated, safe, reliable, timely and effective means of access for people with disabilities. The plan would have to explain how boarding equipment (e.g., bridge plates, lifts, ramps, or other appropriate devices) and/or platforms will be deployed, maintained, and operated, as well as how personnel will be trained and deployed to ensure that service to individuals with disabilities was provided in an integrated, safe, timely, effective, and reliable manner.

FTA and/or FRA will evaluate the proposed plan with respect to whether it will achieve the objectives of the performance standard and may approve, disapprove, or modify it. It should be emphasized that the purpose of FTA/FRA review of this plan is to make sure that whatever approach a railroad chooses will in fact work; that is, it will really result in an integrated, safe, reliable, timely and effective means of access for people with disabilities. If a plan, in the view of FRA or FTA, fails to meet this test, then FTA or FRA can reject it or require the railroad to modify it to meet the objectives of this provision.

In considering railroads' plans, the agencies will consider factors including, but not limited to, how the proposal maximizes integration of and accessibility to individuals with disabilities, any obstacles to the use of a method that could provide better service to individuals with disabilities, the safety and reliability of the approach and related technology proposed to be used, the suitability of the means proposed to the station and line and/or system on which it would be used, and the adequacy of equipment and maintenance and staff training and deployment.

For example, some commenters have expressed significant concerns about the use of station-based lifts, noting instances in which such lifts have not been maintained in a safe and reliable working order. A railroad proposing to use station-based lifts would have to describe to FTA or FRA how it would ensure that the lifts remained in safe and reliable operating condition (such as by cycling the lift daily or other regular maintenance) and how it would ensure that personnel to operate the lift were available in a timely manner to assist passengers in boarding a train. This demonstration must clearly state how the railroad expects that their operations will provide safe and dignified service to the users of such lifts.

In existing stations where it is possible to provide access to every car without station or rail car retrofits, rail providers that receive DOT financial assistance should be mindful of the requirement of 49 CFR 27.7(b)(2), which requires that service be provided “in the most integrated setting that is reasonably achievable.” For example, if a set of rail cars has car-borne lifts that enable the railroad to comply with section 37.42 at new or altered station platforms, it is likely that deployment of this lift at existing stations will be reasonably achievable. Similarly, it is likely that, in a system using mini-high platforms, making multiple stops at existing stations would be reasonable achievable. The use of a station-based lift at an existing station to serve more than one car of a train may well also be reasonably achievable (e.g., with movement of the lift or multiple stops, as needed). Such actions would serve the objective of providing service in an integrated setting. In addition, in situations where a railroad and the Department have negotiated access to every accessible car in an existing system (e.g., with car-borne lifts and mini-high platforms as a back-up), the Department expects the railroads to continue to provide access to every accessible car for people with disabilities.

Section 37.42(e) provides a safety requirement concerning the setback of structures and obstacles (e.g., mini-high platforms, elevators, escalators, and stairwells) from the platform edge. This provision is based on long-standing FRA recommendations and the expertise of the Department's staff. The Department believes that it is inadvisable, with the exception of boarding and alighting a train, to ever have a wheelchair operate over the two-foot wide tactile strips that are parallel to the edge of the platform. This leaves a four-foot distance for a person in a typical wheelchair to maneuver safely past stair wells, elevator shafts, etc. It also is important because a wheelchair user exiting a train at a door where there is not a six-foot clearance would likely have difficulty exiting and making the turn out of the rail car door. The requirement would also avoid channeling pedestrians through a relatively narrow space where, in crowded platform conditions, there would be an increased chance of someone falling off the edge of the platform. Since the rule concerns only new and altered platforms, the Department does not believe the cost or difficulty of designing the platforms to eliminate this hazard will be significant.

Section 37.42(f) provides the maximum gap allowable for a platform to be considered “level.” However, this maximum is not intended to be the norm for new or altered platforms. The Department expects transportation providers to minimize platform gaps to the greatest extent possible by building stations on tangent track and using gap-filling technologies, such as moveable platform edges, threshold plates, platform end boards, and flexible rubber fingers on the ends of platforms. The Department encourages the use of Gap Management Plans and consultation with FRA and/or FTA for guidance on gap safety issues.

Even where level-entry boarding is provided, it is likely that, in many instances, bridge plates would have to be used to enable passengers with disabilities to enter cars, because of the horizontal gaps involved. Section 38.95(c)(5), referred to in the regulatory text, permits various ramp slopes for bridge plates, depending on the vertical gap in given situation. In order to maximize the opportunity of passengers to board independently, the Department urges railroads to use the least steep ramp slope feasible at a given platform.

Section 37.43 Alteration of Transportation Facilities by Public Entities 

This section sets out the accessibility requirements that apply when a public entity undertakes an alteration of an existing facility. In general, the section requires that any alteration, to the maximum extent feasible, results in the altered area being accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including persons who use wheelchairs. The provisions follow closely those adopted by the DOJ, in its regulations implementing title III of the ADA.

The section requires specific activities whenever an alteration of an existing facility is undertaken.

First, if the alteration is made to a primary function area, (or access to an area containing a primary function), the entity shall make the alteration in such a way as to ensure that the path of travel to the altered area and the restrooms, telephones and drinking fountains servicing the altered area are readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs.

Second, alterations to drinking fountains, telephones, and restrooms do not have to be completed if the cost and scope of making them accessible is disproportionate.

Third, the requirement goes into effect for alterations begun after January 25, 1992.

Fourth, the term “maximum extent feasible” means that all changes that are possible must be made. The requirement to make changes to the maximum extent feasible derives from clear legislative history. The Senate Report states—

The phrase “to the maximum extent feasible” has been included to allow for the occasional case in which the nature of an existing facility is such as to make it virtually impossible to renovate the building in a manner that results in its being entirely accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. In all such cases, however, the alteration should provide the maximum amount of physical accessibility feasible.

Thus, for example the term “to the maximum extent feasible” should be construed as not requiring entities to make building alterations that have little likelihood of being accomplished without removing or altering a load-bearing structural member unless the load-bearing structural member is otherwise being removed or altered as part of the alteration. (S. Rept. 101-116, at 68).

Fifth, primary function means a major activity for which the facility is intended. Primary function areas include waiting areas, ticket purchase and collection areas, train or bus platforms, baggage checking and return areas, and employment areas (with some exceptions stated in the rule, for areas used by service personnel that are very difficult to access).

Sixth, “path of travel” means a continuous, unobstructed way of pedestrian passage by means of which the altered area may be approached, entered, and exited, and which connects the altered area with an exterior approach and includes restrooms, telephones, and drinking fountains serving the altered area. If changes to the path of travel are disproportionate, then only those changes which are not disproportionate are to be completed.

Seven, the final rule specifies that costs exceeding 20 percent would be disproportionate. This is consistent with the DOJ. In determining costs, the Department intends costs to be based on changes to the passenger service area that is scheduled for alteration.

Finally, the Department has defined the term “begin”, in the context of begin an alteration that is subject to the alteration provision to mean when a notice to proceed or work order is issued. Two terms are used (instead of only notice to proceed in the context of new construction) because many alterations may be carried out by the entity itself, in which case the only triggering event would be a work order or similar authorization to begin.

In looking at facility concepts like “disproportionality” and “to the maximum extent feasible,” the Department will consider any expenses related to accessibility for passengers. It is not relevant to consider non-passenger related improvements (e.g., installing a new track bed) or to permit “gold-plating” (attributing to accessibility costs the expense of non-related improvements, such as charging to accessibility costs the price of a whole new door, when only adding a new handle to the old door was needed for accessibility).

Section 37.47 Key Stations in Light and Rapid Rail Systems 

Section 37.49 Designation of Responsible Person(s) for Intercity and Commuter Rail Stations 

This section sets forth a mechanism for determining who bears the legal and financial responsibility for accessibility modifications to a commuter and/or intercity rail station. The final provision of the section is the most important. It authorizes all concerned parties to come to their own agreement concerning the allocation of responsibility. Such an agreement can allocate responsibility in any way acceptable to the parties. The Department strongly encourages parties to come to such an agreement.

In the absence of such an agreement, a statutory/regulatory scheme allocates responsibility. In the first, and simplest, situation posed by the statute, a single public entity owns more than 50 percent of the station. In this case, the public entity is the responsible person and nobody else is required to bear any of the responsibility.

In the second situation, a private entity owns more than 50 percent of the station. The private entity need not bear any of the responsibility for making the station accessible. A public entity owner of the station, who does not operate passenger railroad service through the station, is not required to bear any of the responsibility for making the station accessible. The total responsibility is divided between passenger railroads operating service through the station, on the basis of respective passenger boardings. If there is only one railroad operating service through the station, it bears the total responsibility.

The Department believes that reference to passenger boardings is the most equitable way of dividing responsibility among railroads, since the number of people drawn to the station by each is likely to reflect “cost causation” quite closely. The Department notes, however, that, as passenger boarding percentages change over time, the portion of responsibility assigned to each party also may change. Station modifications may involve long-term capital investment and planning, while passenger boarding percentages are more volatile. Some railroads may stop serving a station, while others may begin service, during the period of time before modifications to the station are complete. To help accommodate such situations, the rule refers to passenger boardings “over the entire period during which the station is made accessible.”

This language is intended to emphasize that as circumstances change, the parties involved have the responsibility to adjust their arrangements for cost sharing. For example, suppose Railroad A has 30 percent of the passenger boardings in year 1, but by year 10 has 60 percent of the boardings. It would not be fair for Railroad A to pay only 30 percent of the costs of station modifications occurring in later years. Ultimately, the total cost burden for modifying the station over (for example) 20 years would be allocated on the share of the total number or boardings attributable to each railroad over the whole 20 year period, in order to avoid such unfairness.

The third, and most complicated, situation is one in which no party owns 50 percent of the station. For example, consider the following hypothetical situation:

Party

Ownership percentage

Boardings percentage

Private freight RR

40

0

City

30

0

Amtrak

0

25

Commuter A

30

50

Commuter B

0

25

The private freight railroad drops out of the calculation of who is responsible. All of the responsibility would be allocated among four public entities: the city (a public entity who does not operate railroad service), Amtrak, and the two commuter railroads. Half the responsibility would go to public entity owners of the station (whether or not they are railroads who run passenger service through the station). The other half of the responsibility would go to railroads who run passenger service through the station (whether or not they are station owners). 

On the ownership side of the equation, the city and Commuter A each own half of that portion of the station that is not owned by the private freight railroad. Therefore, the two parties divide up the ownership half of the responsibility equally. Based on their ownership interest, each of these two parties bears 25 percent of the responsibility for the entire station. Note that, should ownership percentages or owners change over the period during which the station is to be made accessible, these percentages may change. It is ownership percentage over this entire period that ultimately determines the percentage of responsibility.

On the passenger rail operations side of the equation, 50 percent of passenger boardings are attributable to Commuter A and 25 percent each to Commuter B and Amtrak. Therefore, half of this portion of the responsibility belongs to Commuter A, while a quarter share each goes to the other railroads. This means that, based on passenger boardings, 25 percent of the responsibility goes to Commuter A, 12.5 percent to Commuter B, and 12.5 percent to Amtrak. Again, it is the proportion of passenger boardings over the entire length of the period during which the station is made accessible that ultimately determines the percentage of responsibility.

In this hypothetical, Commuter A is responsible for a total of 50 percent of the responsibility for the station. Commuter A is responsible for 25 percent of the responsibility because of its role as a station owner and another 25 percent because of its operation of passenger rail service through the station.

The Department recognizes that there will be situations in which application of this scheme will be difficult (e.g., involving problems with multiple owners of a station whose ownership percentages may be difficult to ascertain). The Department again emphasizes that agreement among the parties is the best way of resolving these problems, but we are willing to work with the parties to ensure a solution consistent with this rule.

Section 37.51 Key Stations in Commuter Rail Systems 

These sections require that key stations in light, rapid, and commuter rail systems be made accessible as soon as practicable, but no later than July 26, 1993. Being made accessible, for this purpose, means complying with the applicable provisions of appendix A to this part. “As soon as practicable” means that, if modification can be made before July 26, 1993, they must be. A rail operator that failed to make a station accessible by July 1993 would be in noncompliance with the ADA and this rule, except in a case where an extension of time had been granted.

What is a key station? A key station is one designated as such by the commuter authority or light/rapid rail operator, through the planning process and public participation process set forth in this section. The five criteria listed in the regulation are intended to guide the selection process but, while the entity must take these criteria into account (and this consideration must be reflected in the planning process and documents), they are not mandatory selection standards. That is, it is not required that every station that meets one of the criteria be designated as a key station. Since the criteria are not mandatory selection standards, the understanding of their terms is also a matter appropriately left to the planning process. A tight, legalistic definition is not necessary in the context of factors intended for consideration. For instance, what constitutes a major activity center or how close a station needs to be to another station to not be designated as key depend largely on local factors that it would not be reasonable to specify in this rule.

Given the wide discretion permitted to rail operators in identifying key stations, there would be no objection to identifying as a key station a new (presumably accessible) station now under construction. Doing so would involve consideration of the key station criteria and would be subject to the planning/public participation process.

If an extension to a rail system (e.g., a commuter system) is made, such that the system comes to include existing inaccessible stations that have not previously been part of the system, the Department construes the ADA to require application of key station accessibility in such a situation. The same would be true for a new start commuter rail system that began operations using existing stations. Key station planning, designation of key stations, and with being consistent with the ADA would be required. The Department would work with the commuter authority involved on a case-by-case basis to determine applicable time limits for accessibility, consistent with the time frames of the ADA.

The entity must develop a compliance plan, subject to the public participation and planning process set forth in paragraph (d) of each of these sections. Note that this plan must be completed by July 26, 1992, not January 26, 1992, as in the case of paratransit plans. The key station plans must be submitted to FTA at that time. (The statute does not require FTA approval of the plans, however.).

A rail operator may request an extension of the July 1993 completion deadline for accessibility modifications to one or more key stations. The extension for light and rapid rail stations can be up to July 2020, though two thirds of the key stations (per the legislative history of the statute, selected in a way to maximize accessibility to the whole system) must be accessible by July 2010.

Commuter rail stations can be extended up to July 2010.

Requests for extension of time must be submitted by July 26, 1992. FTA will review the requests on a station-by-station basis according to the statutory criterion, which is whether making the station accessible requires extraordinarily expensive alterations. An extraordinarily expensive alteration is raising the entire platform, installing an elevator, or making another alteration of similar cost and magnitude. If another means of making a station accessible (e.g., installation of a mini-high platform in a station where it is not necessary to install an elevator or to provide access to the platform for wheelchair users), then an extension can be granted only if the rail operator shows that the cost and magnitude of the alteration is similar to that of an elevator installation or platform raising.

The rule does not include a specific deadline for FTA consideration of an extension request. However, since we are aware that, in the absence of an extension request, accessibility must be completed by July 1993, we will endeavor to complete review of plans as soon as possible, to give as much lead time as possible to local planning and implementation efforts.

Once an extension is granted, the extension applies to all accessibility modifications in the station. However, the rail operator should not delay non-extraordinarily expensive modifications to the station. The key station plan and any extension request should include a schedule for phasing in non-extraordinarily expensive modifications to the station. For example, even if a key station is not going to be accessible to wheelchair users for 15 years, pending the installation of an elevator, the rail operator can improve its accessibility to persons with visual impairments by installing tactile strips.

An extension cannot be granted except for a particular station which needs an extraordinarily expensive modification. An extension cannot be granted non-extraordinarily expensive changes to Station B because the extraordinarily expensive changes to Station A will absorb many resources. Non-extraordinarily expensive changes, however costly considered collectively for a system, are not, under the statute, grounds for granting an extension to one or more stations or the whole system. Only particular stations where an extraordinarily expensive modification must be made qualify for extensions.

The FTA Administrator can approve, modify, or disapprove any request for an extension. For example, it is not a forgone conclusion that a situation for which an extension is granted will have the maximum possible extension granted. If it appears that the rail operator can make some stations accessible sooner, FTA can grant an extension for a shorter period (e.g., 2005 for a particular station rather than 2010).

Section 37.53 Exception for New York and Philadelphia 

Consistent with the legislative history of the ADA, this section formally recognizes the selection of key stations in two identified litigation settlement agreements in New York and Philadelphia as in compliance with the ADA. Consequently, the entities involved can limit their key station planning process to issues concerning the timing of key station accessibility. The section references also § 37.9, which provides that key station accessibility alterations which have already been made, or which are begun before January 26, 1992, and which conform to specified prior standards, do not have to be re-modified. On the other hand, alterations begun after January 25, 1992 (including forthcoming key station modifications under the New York and Philadelphia agreements), must meet the requirements of appendix A to this part.

This is an exception only for the two specified agreements. There are no situations in which other cities can take advantage of this provision. Nor are the provisions of the two agreements normative for other cities. Other cities must do their own planning, with involvement from local citizens, and cannot rely on agreements unique to New York and Philadelphia to determine the appropriate number of percentage of key stations or other matters.

Section 37.57 Required Cooperation 

This section implements § 242(e)(2)(C) of the ADA, which treats as discrimination a failure, by an owner or person in control of an intercity rail station, to provide reasonable cooperation to the responsible persons' efforts to comply with accessibility requirements. For example, the imposition by the owner of an unreasonable insurance bond from the responsible person as a condition of making accessibility modifications would violate this requirement. See H. Rept. 101-485 at 53.

The statute also provides that failure of the owner or person in control to cooperate does not create a defense to a discrimination suit against the responsible person, but the responsible person would have a third party action against the uncooperative owner or person in control. The rule does not restate this portion of the statute in the regulation, since it would be implemented by the courts if such an action is brought. Since cooperation is also a regulatory requirement, however, the Department could entertain a section 504 complaint against a recipient of Federal funds who failed to cooperate.

The House Energy and Commerce Committee provided as an example of an action under this provision a situation in which a failure to cooperate leads to a construction delay, which in turn leads to a lawsuit by an individual with disabilities against the responsible person for missing an accessibility deadline. The responsible person could not use the lack of cooperation as a defense in the lawsuit, but the uncooperative party could be made to indemnify the responsible person for damages awarded the plaintiff. Also, a responsible person could obtain an injunction to force the recalcitrant owner or controller of the station to permit accessibility work to proceed. (Id.)

This provision does not appear to be intended to permit a responsible person to seek contribution for a portion of the cost of accessibility work from a party involved with the station whom the statute and § 37.49 do not identify as a responsible person. It simply provides a remedy for a situation in which someone impedes the responsible person's efforts to comply with accessibility obligations.

Section 37.59 Differences in Accessibility Completion Date Requirements 

Portions of the same station may have different accessibility completion date requirements, both as the result of different statutory time frames for different kinds of stations and individual decisions made on requests for extension. The principle at work in responding to such situations is that if part of a station may be made accessible after another part, the “late” part of the work should not get in the way of people's use of modifications resulting from the “early” part.

For example, the commuter part of a station may have to be made accessible by July 1993 (e.g., there is no need to install an elevator, and platform accessibility can be achieved by use of a relatively inexpensive mini-high platform). The Amtrak portion of the same station, by statute, is required to be accessible as soon as practicable, but no later than July 2010. If there is a common entrance to the station, that commuter rail passengers and Amtrak passengers both use, or a common ticket counter, it would have to be accessible by July 1993. If there were a waiting room used by Amtrak passengers but not commuter passengers (who typically stand and wait on the platform at this station), it would not have to be accessible by July 1993, but if the path from the common entrance to the commuter platform went through the waiting room, the path would have to be an accessible path by July 1993.

Section 37.61 Public Transportation Programs and Activities in Existing Facilities 

This section implements section 228(a) of the ADA and establishes the general requirement for entities to operate their transportation facilities in a manner that, when viewed in its entirety, is accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. The section clearly excludes from this requirement access by persons in wheelchairs, unless these changes would be necessitated by the alterations or key station provisions.

This provision is intended to cover activities and programs of an entity that do not rise to the level of alteration. Even if an entity is not making alterations to a facility, it has a responsibility to conduct its program in an accessible manner. Examples of possible activities include user friendly farecards, schedules, of edge detection on rail platforms, adequate lighting, telecommunication display devices (TDDs) or text telephones, and other accommodations for use by persons with speech and hearing impairments, signage for people with visual impairments, continuous pathways for persons with visual and ambulatory impairments, and public address systems and clocks.

The Department did not prescribe one list of things that would be appropriate for all stations. For example, we believe that tactile strips are a valuable addition to platforms which have drop-offs. We also believe that most larger systems, to the extent they publish schedules, should make those schedules readily available in alternative formats. We encourage entities to find this another area which benefits from its commitment to far-reaching public participation efforts.

Subpart D—Acquisition of Accessible Vehicles by Public Entities 

Section 37.71 Purchase or Lease of New Non-Rail Vehicles by Public Entities Operating Fixed Route Systems 

This section generally sets out the basic acquisition requirements for a public entity purchasing a new vehicle. The section requires any public entity that purchases or leases a new vehicle to acquire an accessible vehicle.

In addition, the waiver request must include copies of advertisements in trade publications and inquiries to trade associations seeking lifts for the buses. The public entity also must include a full justification for the assertion that a delay in the bus procurement sufficient to obtain a lift-equipped bus would significantly impair transportation services in the community. There is no length of time that would be a per se delay constituting a “significant impairment”. It will be more difficult to obtain a waiver if a relatively short rather than relatively lengthy delay is involved. A showing of timetables, absent a showing of significant impairment of actual transit services, would not form a basis for granting a waiver.

Any waiver granted by the Department under this provision will be a conditional waiver. The conditions are intended to ensure that the waiver provision does not create a loophole in the accessible vehicle acquisition requirement that Congress intended to impose. The ADA requires a waiver to be limited in duration and the rule requires a termination date to be included. The date will be established on the basis of the information the Department receives concerning the availability of lifts in the waiver request and elsewhere. In addition, so that a waiver does not become open-ended, it will apply only to a particular procurement. If a transit agency wants a waiver for a subsequent delivery of buses in the procurement, or another procurement entirely, it will have to make a separate waiver request.

For example, if a particular order of buses is delivered over a period of time, each delivery would be the potential subject of a waiver request. First, the entity would request a waiver for the first shipment of buses. If all of the conditions are met, the waiver would be granted, with a date specified to coincide with the due date of the lifts. When the lifts become available those buses would have to be retrofitted with the lifts. A subsequent delivery of buses—on the same order—would have to receive its own waiver, subject to the same conditions and specifications of the first waiver.

The purpose of the waiver, as the Department construes it, is to address a situation in which (because of a sudden increase in the number of lift-equipped buses requested) lift manufacturers are unable to produce enough lifts to meet the demand in a timely fashion.

Section 37.73 Purchase or Lease of Used Non-Rail Vehicles by Public Entities Operating a Fixed Route System 

The basic rule is that an acquisition of a used vehicle would have to be for an accessible vehicle.

There is an exception, however, for situations in which the transit provider makes a good faith effort to obtain accessible used vehicles but does not succeed in finding them. The ADA requires transit agencies to purchase accessible used vehicles, providing a “demonstrated good faith efforts” exception to the requirement. The reports of the Senate Committee on Labor and Human Resources and the House Committee on Education and Labor offered the following guidance on what “good faith efforts” involve:

The phrase “demonstrated good faith efforts” is intended to require a nationwide search and not a search limited to a particular region. For instance, it would not be enough for a transit operator to contact only the manufacturer where the transit authority usually does business to see if there are accessible used buses. It involves the transit authority advertising in a trade magazine, i.e., Passenger Transport, or contacting the transit trade association, American Public Transit Association (APTA), to determine whether accessible used vehicles are available. It is the Committee's expectation that as the number of buses with lifts increases, the burden on the transit authority to demonstrate its inability to purchase accessible vehicles despite good faith efforts will become more and more difficult to satisfy. S. Rept. 101-116 at 49; H. Rept. 101-485 at 90.

Consistent with this guidance, this section requires that good faith efforts include specifying accessible vehicles in bid solicitations. The section also requires that the entity retain for two years documentation of that effort, and that the information be available to FTA and the public.

It does not meet the good faith efforts requirement to purchase inaccessible, rather than accessible, used buses, just because the former are less expensive, particularly if the difference is a difference attributable to the presence of a lift. There may be situations in which good faith efforts involve buying fewer accessible buses in preference to more inaccessible buses.

The public participation requirements involved in the development of the paratransit plans for all fixed route operators requires an ongoing relationship, including extensive outreach, to the community likely to be using its accessible service. We believe that it will be difficult to comply with the public participation requirements and not involve the affected community in the decisions concerning the purchase or lease of used accessible vehicles.

There is an exception to these requirements for donated vehicles. Not all “zero dollar” transfers are donations, however. The legislative history to this provision provides insight.

It is not the Committee's intent to make the vehicle accessibility provisions of this title applicable to vehicles donated to a public entity. The Committee understands that it is not usual to donate vehicles to a public entity. However, there could be instances where someone could conceivably donate a bus to a public transit operator in a will. In such a case, the transit operators should not be prevented from accepting a gift.

The Committee does not intend that this limited exemption for donated vehicles be used to circumvent the intent of the ADA. For example, a local transit authority could not arrange to be the recipient of donated inaccessible buses. This would be a violation of the ADA. S. Rpt. 101-116, at 46; H. Rpt. 101-486, at 87.

Entities interested in accepting donated vehicles must submit a request to FTA to verify that the transaction is a donation.

There is one situation, in which a vehicle has prior use is not treated as a used vehicle. If a vehicle has been remanufactured, and it is within the period of the extension of its useful life, it is not viewed as a used vehicle (see H. Rept. 101-485, Pt 1 at 27). During this period, such a vehicle may be acquired by another entity without going through the good faith efforts process. This is because, at the time of its remanufacture, the bus would have been made as accessible if feasible. When the vehicle has completed its extended useful life (e.g., the beginning of year six when its useful life has extended five years), it becomes subject to used bus requirements.

Section 37.75 Remanufacture of Non-Rail Vehicles and Purchase or Lease of Remanufactured Non-rail Vehicles by Public Entities Operating Fixed Route Systems 

This section tracks the statute closely, and contains the following provisions. First, it requires any public entity operating a fixed route system to purchase an accessible vehicle if the acquisition occurs after August 25, 1990, if the vehicle is remanufactured after August 25, 1990, or the entity contracts or undertakes the remanufacture of a vehicle after August 25, 1990. The ADA legislative history makes it clear that remanufacture is to include changes to the structure of the vehicle which extend the useful life of the vehicle for five years. It clearly is not intended to capture things such as engine overhauls and the like.

The term remanufacture, as used in the ADA context, is different from the use of the term in previously issued FTA guidance. The term has a specific meaning under the ADA: there must be structural work done to the vehicle and the work must extend the vehicle's useful life by five years.

The ADA imposes no requirements on what FTA traditionally considers bus rehabilitation. Such work involves rebuilding a bus to original specifications and focuses on mechanical systems and interiors. Often this work includes replacing components. It is less extensive than remanufacture.

The statute, and the rule, includes an exception for the remanufacture of historical vehicles. This exception applies to the remanufacture of or purchase of a remanufactured vehicle that (1) is of historic character; (2) operates solely on a segment of a fixed route system which is on the National Register of Historic Places; and (3) making the vehicle accessible would significantly alter the historic character of the vehicle. The exception only extends to the remanufacture that would alter the historic character of the vehicle. All modifications that can be made without altering the historic character (such as slip resistant flooring) must be done.

Section 37.77 Purchase or Lease of New Non-Rail Vehicles by Public Entities Operating a Demand Responsive System for the General Public 

Section 224 of the ADA requires that a public entity operating a demand responsive system purchase or lease accessible new vehicles, for which a solicitation is made after August 25, 1990, unless the system, when viewed in its entirety, provides a level of service to individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs, equivalent to the level of service provided to individuals without disabilities. This section is the same as the October 4, 1990 final rule which promulgated the immediately effective acquisition requirements of the ADA.

The Department has been asked to clarify what “accessible when viewed in its entirety” means in the context of a demand responsive system being allowed to purchase an inaccessible vehicle. First, it is important to note that this exception applies only to demand responsive systems (and not fixed route systems). The term “equivalent service” was discussed during the passage of the ADA. Material from the legislative history indicates that “when viewed in its entirety/equivalent service” means that “when all aspects of a transportation system are analyzed, equal opportunities for each individual with a disability to use the transportation system must exist. (H. Rept. 101-184, Pt. 2, at 95; S. Rept. 101-116 at 54). For example, both reports said that “the time delay between a phone call to access the demand responsive system and pick up the individual is not greater because the individual needs a lift or ramp or other accommodation to access the vehicle.” (Id.)

Consistent with this, the Department has specified certain service criteria that are to be used when determining if the service is equivalent. As in previous rulemakings on this provision, the standards (which include service area, response time, fares, hours and days of service, trip purpose restrictions, information and reservations capability, and other capacity constraints) are not absolute standards. They do not say, for example, that a person with a disability must be picked up in a specified number of hours. The requirement is that there must be equivalent service for all passengers, whether or not they have a disability. If the system provides service to persons without disabilities within four hours of a call for service, then passengers with disabilities must be afforded the same service.

The Department has been asked specifically where an entity should send its “equivalent level of service” certifications. We provide the following: Equivalent level of service certifications should be submitted to the state program office if you are a public entity receiving FTA funds through the state. All other entities should submit their equivalent level of service certifications to the FTA regional office (listed in appendix B of this part). Certifications must be submitted before the acquisition of the vehicles.

Paragraph (e) of this section authorizes a waiver for the unavailability of lifts. Since demand responsive systems need not purchase accessible vehicles if they can certify equivalent service, the Department has been asked what this provision is doing in this section.

Paragraph (e) applies in the case in which an entity operates a demand responsive system, which is not equivalent, and the entity cannot find accessible vehicles to acquire. In this case, the waiver provisions applicable to a fixed route entity purchasing or leasing inaccessible new vehicles applies to the demand responsive operator as well.

Section 37.79 Purchase or Lease of New Rail Vehicles by Public Entities Operating Rapid or Light Rail Systems 

This section echoes the requirement of § 37.71—all new rail cars must be accessible.

Section 37.81 Purchase or Lease of Used Rail Vehicles by Public Entities Operating Rapid or Light Rail Systems 

This section lays out the requirements for a public entity acquiring a used rail vehicle. The requirements and standards are the same as those specified for non-rail vehicles in § 37.73. While we recognize it may create difficulties for entities in some situations, the statute does not include any extension or short-term leases. The Department will consider, in a case-by-case basis, how the good faith efforts requirement would apply in the case of an agreement between rail carriers to permit quick-response, short-term leases of cars over a period of time.

Section 37.83 Remanufacture of Rail Vehicles and Purchase or Lease of Remanufactured Rail Vehicles by Public Entities Operating Rapid or Light Rail System 

This section parallels the remanufacturing section for buses, including the exception for historical vehicles. With respect to an entity having a class of historic vehicles that may meet the standards for the historic vehicle exception (e.g., San Francisco cable cars), the Department would not object to a request for application of the exception on a system-wide, as approved to car-by-car, basis.

Section 37.85 Purchase or Lease of New Intercity and Commuter Rail Cars 

This section incorporates the statutory requirement that new intercity and commuter rail cars be accessible. The specific accessibility provisions of the statute (for example, there are slightly different requirements for intercity rail cars versus commuter rail cars) are specified in part 38 of this regulation. These standards are adopted from the voluntary guidelines issues by the Access Board. The section basically parallels the acquisition requirements for buses and other vehicles. It should be noted that the definition of commuter rail operator clearly allows for additional operators to qualify as commuter, since the definition describes the functional characteristics of an operator, as well as listing existing commuter rail operators.

We would point out that the ADA applies this requirement to all new vehicles. This includes not only vehicles and systems that currently are being operated in the U.S., but new, experimental, or imported vehicles and systems. The ADA does not stand in the way of new technology, but it does require that new technology, and the benefits it brings, be accessible to all persons, including those with disabilities. This point applies to all vehicle acquisition provisions of this regulation, whether for rail or non-rail, private or public, fixed route or demand responsive vehicles and systems.

Section 37.87 Purchase or Lease of Used Intercity and Commuter Rail Cars 

The section also parallels closely the requirements in the ADA for the purchase or lease of accessible used rail vehicles. We acknowledge that, in some situations, the statutory requirement for to make good faith efforts to acquire accessible used vehicles may create difficulties for rail operators attempting to lease rail cars quickly for a short time (e.g., as fill-ins for cars which need repairs). In some cases, it may be possible to mitigate these difficulties through means such as making good faith efforts with respect to an overall agreement between two rail operators to make cars available to one another when needed, rather than each time a car is provided under such an agreement.

Section 37.89 Remanufacture of Intercity and Commuter Rail Cars 

This section requires generally that remanufactured cars be made accessible, to the maximum extent feasible. Feasible is defined in paragraph (c) of the section to be “unless an engineering analysis demonstrates that remanufacturing the car to be accessible would have a significant adverse effect on the structural integrity of the car.” Increased cost is not a reason for viewing other sections of this subpart concerning remanufactured vehicles.

In addition, this section differs from the counterpart sections for non-rail vehicles and light and rapid rail vehicles in two ways. First, the extension of useful life needed to trigger the section is ten rather than five years. Second, there is no historic vehicle exception. Both of these differences are statutory.

Remanufacture of vehicles implies work that extends their expected useful life of the vehicle. A mid-life overhaul, not extending the total useful life of the vehicle, would not be viewed as a remanufacture of the vehicle.

Section 37.93 One Car Per Train Rule 

This section implements the statutory directive that all rail operators (light, rapid, commuter and intercity) have at least one car per train accessible to persons with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs by July 26, 1995. (See ADA sections 242(a)(1), 242(b)(1), 228(b)(1).) Section 37.93 contains this general requirement. In some cases, entities will meet the one-car-per train rule through the purchase of new cars. In this case, since all new rail vehicles have to be accessible, compliance with this provision is straightforward.

However, certain entities may not be purchasing any new vehicles by July 26, 1995, or may not be purchasing enough vehicles to ensure that one car per train is accessible. In these cases, these entities will have to retrofit existing cars to meet this requirement. What a retrofitted car must look like to meet the requirement has been decided by the Access Board. These standards are contained in part 38 of this rule.

We would point that, consistent with the Access Board standards, a rail system using mini-high platforms or wayside lifts is not required, in most circumstances, to “double-stop” in order to give passengers a chance to board the second or subsequent car in a train at the mini-high platform or way-side lift. The only exception to this would be a situation in which all the wheelchair positions spaces in the first car were occupied. In this case, the train would have to double-stop to allow a wheelchair user to board, rather than passing the person by when there was space available in other than the first car, except where doing is necessary to comply with the provisions of section 37.42 of this part.

Section 37.95 Ferries and Other Passenger Vessels 

Although at this time there are no specific requirements for vessels, ferries and other passenger vessels operated by public entities are subject to the requirements of § 37.5 of this part and applicable requirements of 28 CFR part 35, the DOJ rule under title II of the ADA.

Subpart E—Acquisition of Accessible Vehicles by Private Entities 

Section 37.101 Purchase or Lease of Non-Rail Vehicles by Private Entities Not Primarily Engaged in the Business of Transporting People 

Section 37.103 Purchase or Lease of New Non-Rail Vehicles by Private Entities Primarily Engaged in the Business of Transporting People 

Section 37.105 Equivalent Service Standard 

The first two sections spell out the distinctions among the different types of service elaborated in the ADA and requirements that apply to them. For clarity, we provide the following chart.

Private Entities “Not Primarily Engaged”

System type

Vehicle capacity

Requirement

Fixed Route

Over 16

Acquire accessible vehicle.

Fixed Route

16 or less

Acquire accessible vehicle, or equivalency.

Demand Responsive

Over 16

Acquire accessible vehicle, or equivalency.

Demand Responsive

16 or less

Equivalency—see § 37.171.

Private Entities “Primarily Engaged”

System type

Vehicle type/capacity

Requirement

Fixed route

All new vehicles except auto, van with less than 8 capacity, or over the road bus

Acquire accessible vehicle.

Demand responsive

Same as above

Acquire accessible vehicle, or equivalency.

Either fixed route or demand responsive

New vans with a capacity of less than 8

Same as above.

Equivalency, for purposes of these requirements, is spelled out in § 37.105. It is important to note that some portions of this section (referring to response time, reservations capacity, and restrictions on trip purpose) apply only to demand responsive systems. Another provision (schedules/headways) applies only to fixed route systems. This is because these points of comparison apply only to one or the other type system. The remaining provisions apply to both kinds of systems.

In applying the provisions this section, it is important to note that they are only points of comparison, not substantive criteria. For example, unlike the response time criterion of § 37.131, this section does not require that a system provide any particular response time. All it says is that, in order for there to be equivalency, if the demand responsive system gets a van to a non-disabled person in 2 hours, or 8 hours, or a week and a half after a call for service, the system must get an accessible van to a person with a disability in 2 hours, or 8 hours, or a week and a half.

The vehicle acquisition and equivalency provisions work together in the following way. A private entity is about to acquire a vehicle for a transportation service in one of the categories to which equivalency is relevant. The entity looks at its present service (considered without regard to the vehicle it plans to acquire). Does the present service meet the equivalency standard? (In answering this question, the point of reference is the next potential customer who needs an accessible vehicle. The fact that such persons have not called in the past is irrelevant). If not, the entity is required to acquire an accessible vehicle. If so, the entity may acquire an accessible or an inaccessible vehicle. This process must be followed every time the entity purchases or leases a vehicle. Given changes in the mixes of both customers and vehicles, the answer to the question about equivalency will probably not be the same for an entity every time it is asked.

One difference between the requirements for “private, not primarily” and “private, primarily” entities is that the requirements apply to all vehicles purchased or leased for the former, but only to new vehicles for the latter. This means that entities in the latter category are not required to acquire accessible vehicles when they purchase or lease used vehicles. Another oddity in the statute which entities should note is that the requirement for “private, primarily” entities to acquire accessible vans with less than eight passenger capacity (or provide equivalent service) does not become effective until after February 25, 1992 (This also date also applies no private entities “primarily engaged” which purchase passenger rail cars). All other vehicle acquisition requirements became effective after August 25, 1990.

The Department views the line between “private, primarily” and “private, not primarily” entities as being drawn with respect to the bus, van, or other service which the entity is providing. For example, there is an obvious sense in which an airline or car rental company is primarily engaged in the business of transporting people. If the airline or car rental agency runs a shuttle bus from the airport terminal to a downtown location or a rental car lot, however, the Department views that shuttle service as covered by the “private, not primarily” requirements of the rule (see discussion of the Applicability sections above). This is because the airline or car rental agency is not primarily engaged in the business of providing transportation by bus or van. The relationship of the bus or van service to an airline's main business is analogous to that of a shuttle to a hotel. For this purpose, it is of only incidental interest that the main business of the airline is flying people around the country instead of putting them up for the night.

Section 37.109 Ferries and Other Passenger Vessels 

Although at this time there are no specific requirements for vessels, ferries and other passenger vessels operated by private entities are subject to the requirements of § 37.5 of this part and applicable requirements of 28 CFR part 36, the DOJ rule under title III of the ADA.

Subpart F—Paratransit as a Complement to Fixed Route Service 

Section 37.121 Requirement for Comparable Complementary Paratransit Service 

This section sets forth the basic requirement that all public entities who operate a fixed route system have to provide paratransit service that is both comparable and complementary to the fixed route service. By “complementary,” we mean service that acts as a “safety net” for individuals with disabilities who cannot use the fixed route system. By “comparable,” we mean service that meets the service criteria of this subpart.

This requirement applies to light and rapid rail systems as well as to bus systems, even when rail and bus systems share all or part of the same service area. Commuter bus, commuter rail and intercity rail systems do not have to provide paratransit, however. The remaining provisions of subpart F set forth the details of the eligibility requirements for paratransit, the service criteria that paratransit systems must meet, the planning process involved, and the procedures for applying for waivers based on undue financial burden.

Paratransit may be provided by a variety of modes. Publicly operated dial-a-ride vans, service contracted out to a private paratransit provider, user-side subsidy programs, or any combination of these and other approaches is acceptable. Entities who feel it necessary to apply for an undue financial burden waiver should be aware that one of the factors FTA will examine in evaluating waiver requests is efficiencies the provider could realize in its paratransit service. Therefore, it is important for entities in this situation to use the most economical and efficient methods of providing paratransit they can devise.

It is also important for them to establish and consistently implement strong controls against fraud, waste and abuse in the paratransit system. Fraud, waste and abuse can drain significant resources from a system and control of these problems is an important “efficiency for any paratransit system. It will be difficult for the Department to grant an undue financial burden waiver to entities which do not have a good means of determining if fraud, waste and abuse are problems and adequate methods of combating these problems, where they are found to exist.

Section 37.123 ADA Paratransit Eligibility—Standards 

General Provisions 

This section sets forth the minimum requirements for eligibility for complementary paratransit service. All fixed route operators providing complementary paratransit must make service available at least to individuals meeting these standards. The ADA does not prohibit providing paratransit service to anyone. Entities may provide service to additional persons as well. Since only service to ADA eligible persons is required by the rule, however, only the costs of this service can be counted in the context of a request for an undue financial burden waiver.

When the rule says that ADA paratransit eligibility shall be strictly limited to persons in the eligible categories, then, it is not saying that entities are in any way precluded from serving other people. It is saying that the persons who must be provided service, and counting the costs of providing them service, in context of an undue burden waiver, are limited to the regulatory categories.

Temporary Disabilities 

Eligibility may be based on a temporary as well as a permanent disability. The individual must meet one of the three eligibility criteria in any case, but can do so for a limited period of time. For example, if an individual breaks both legs and is in two casts for several weeks, becomes a wheelchair user for the duration, and the bus route that would normally take him to work is not accessible, the individual could be eligible under the second eligibility category. In granting eligibility to such a person, the entity should establish an expiration date for eligibility consistent with the expected end of the period disability.

Trip-by-Trip Eligibility 

A person may be ADA paratransit eligible for some trips but not others. Eligibility does not inhere in the individual or his or her disability, as such, but in meeting the functional criteria of inability to use the fixed route system established by the ADA. This inability is likely to change with differing circumstances.

For example, someone whose impairment-related condition is a severe sensitivity to temperatures below 20 degrees is not prevented from using fixed route transit when the temperature is 75 degrees. Someone whose impairment-related condition is an inability to maneuver a wheelchair through snow is not prevented from using fixed route transit when there is no snow on the ground. Someone with a cognitive disability may have learned to take the same bus route to a supported employment job every day. This individual is able to navigate the system for work purposes and therefore would not be eligible for paratransit for work trips. But the individual may be unable to get to other destinations on the bus system without getting lost, and would be eligible for paratransit for non-work trips. Someone who normally drives his own car to a rail system park and ride lot may have a specific impairment related condition preventing him from getting to the station when his car is in the shop. A person who can use accessible fixed route service can go to one destination on an accessible route; another destination would require the use of an inaccessible route. The individual would be eligible for the latter but not the former.

In many cases, though the person is eligible for some trips but not others, eligibility determinations would not have to be made literally on a trip-by-trip basis. It may often be possible to establish the conditions on eligibility as part of the initial eligibility determination process. Someone with a temperature sensitivity might be granted seasonal eligibility. Somebody who is able to navigate the system for work but not non-work trips could have this fact noted in his or her eligibility documentation. Likewise, someone with a variable condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis, HIV disease, need for kidney dialysis) could have their eligibility based on the underlying condition, with paratransit need for a particular trip dependent on self-assessment or a set of medical standards (e.g., trip within a certain amount of time after a dialysis session). On the other hand, persons in the second eligibility category (people who can use accessible fixed route service where it exists) would be given service on the basis of the particular route they would use for a given trip.

Because entities are not precluded from providing service beyond that required by the rule, an entity that believes it is too difficult to administer a program of trip-by-trip eligibility is not required to do so. Nothing prevents an entity from providing all requested trips to a person whom the ADA requires to receive service for only some trips. In this case, if the entity intends to request an undue financial burden waiver, the entity, as provided in the undue burden provisions of this rule, must estimate, by a statistically valid technique, the percentage of its paratransit trips that are mandated by the ADA. Only that percentage of its total costs will be counted in considering the undue burden waiver request.

Category 1 Eligibility 

The first eligibility category includes, among others, persons with mental or visual impairments who, as a result, cannot “navigate the system.” This eligibility category includes people who cannot board, ride, or disembark from an accessible vehicle “without the assistance of another individual.” This means that, if an individual needs an attendant to board, ride, or disembark from an accessible fixed route vehicles (including “navigating the system”), the individual is eligible for paratransit. One implication of this language is that an individual does not lose paratransit eligibility based on “inability to navigate the system” because the individual chooses to travel with a friend on the paratransit system (even if the friend could help the person navigate the fixed route system). Eligibility in this category is based on ability to board, ride, and disembark independently.

Mobility training (e.g., of persons with mental or visual impairments) may help to improve the ability of persons to navigate the system or to get to a bus stop. Someone who is successfully mobility trained to use the fixed route system for all or some trips need not be provided paratransit service for those trips. The Department encourages entities to sponsor such training as a means of assisting individuals to use fixed route rather than paratransit.

Category 2 Eligibility 

The second eligibility criterion is the broadest, with respect to persons with mobility impairments, but its impact should be reduced over time as transit systems become more accessible. This category applies to persons who could use accessible fixed route transportation, but accessible transportation is not being used at the time, and on the route, the persons would travel. This concept is route based, not system based.

Speaking first of bus systems, if a person is traveling from Point A to Point B on route 1, and route 1 is accessible, the person is not eligible for paratransit for the trip. This is true even though other portions of the system are still inaccessible. If the person is traveling from Point A to Point C on route 2, which is not accessible, the person is eligible for that trip. If the person is traveling from Point A to Point B on accessible route 1, with a transfer at B to go on inaccessible route 3 to Point D, then the person is eligible for the second leg of the trip. (The entity could choose to provide a paratransit trip from A to D or a paratransit or on-call bus trip from B to D.)

For purposes of this standard, we view a route as accessible when all buses scheduled on the route are accessible. Otherwise, it is unlikely that an accessible vehicle could be provided “within a reasonable period of [a] time” when the individual wants to travel, as the provision requires. We recognize that some systems' operations may not be organized in a way that permits determining whether a given route is accessible, even though a route-by-route determination appears to be contemplated by the statute. In such cases, it may be that category 2 eligibility would persist until the entire system was eligible.

With respect to a rail system, an individual is eligible under this standard if, on the route or line he or she wants to use, there is not yet one car per train accessible or if key stations are not yet accessible. This eligibility remains even if bus systems covering the area served by the rail system have become 100 percent accessible. This is necessary because people use rail systems for different kinds of trips than bus systems. It would often take much more in the way of time, trouble, and transfers for a person to go on the buses of one or more transit authorities than to have a direct trip provided by the rail operator. Since bus route systems are often designed to feed rail systems rather than duplicate them, it may often be true that “you can't get there from here” relying entirely on bus routes or the paratransit service area that parallels them.

If the lift on a vehicle cannot be deployed at a particular stop, an individual is eligible for paratransit under this category with respect to the service to the inaccessible stop. If on otherwise accessible route 1, an individual wants to travel from Point A to Point E, and the lift cannot be deployed at E, the individual is eligible for paratransit for the trip. (On-call bus would not work as a mode of providing this trip, since a bus lift will not deploy at the stop.) This is true even though service from Point A to all other points on the line is fully accessible. In this circumstance, the entity should probably think seriously about working with the local government involved to have the stop moved or made accessible.

When we say that a lift cannot be deployed, we mean literally that the mechanism will not work at the location to permit a wheelchair user or other person with a disability to disembark or that the lift will be damaged if it is used there. It is not consistent with the rule for a transit provider to declare a stop off-limits to someone who uses the lift while allowing other passengers to use the stop. However, if temporary conditions not under the operator's control (e.g., construction, an accident, a landslide) make it so hazardous for anyone to disembark that the stop is temporarily out of service for all passengers may the operator refuse to allow a passenger to disembark using the lift.

Category 3 Eligibility 

The third eligibility criterion concerns individuals who have a specific impairment-related condition which prevents them from getting to or from a stop or station. As noted in the legislative history of the ADA, this is intended to be a “very narrow exception” to the general rule that difficulty in traveling to or from boarding or disembarking locations is not a basis for eligibility.

What is a specific impairment-related condition? The legislative history mentions four examples: Chronic fatigue, blindness, a lack of cognitive ability to remember and follow directions, or a special sensitivity to temperature. Impaired mobility, severe communications disabilities (e.g., a combination of serious vision and hearing impairments), cardiopulmonary conditions, or various other serious health problems may have similar effects. The Department does not believe that it is appropriate, or even possible, to create an exhaustive list.

What the rule uses as an eligibility criterion is not just the existence of a specific impairment-related condition. To be a basis for eligibility, the condition must prevent the individual from traveling to a boarding location or from a disembarking location. The word “prevent” is very important. For anyone, going to a bus stop and waiting for a bus is more difficult and less comfortable than waiting for a vehicle at one's home. This is likely to be all the more true for an individual with a disability. But for many persons with disabilities, in many circumstances, getting to a bus stop is possible. If an impairment related condition only makes the job of accessing transit more difficult than it might otherwise be, but does not prevent the travel, then the person is not eligible.

For example, in many areas, there are not yet curb cuts. A wheelchair user can often get around this problem by taking a less direct route to a destination than an ambulatory person would take. That involves more time, trouble, and effort than for someone without a mobility impairment. But the person can still get to the bus stop. On the basis of these architectural barriers, the person would not be eligible.

Entities are cautioned that, particularly in cases involving lack of curb cuts and other architectural barrier problems, assertions of eligibility should be given tight scrutiny. Only if it is apparent from the facts of a particular case that an individual cannot find a reasonable alternative path to a location should eligibility be granted.

If we add a foot of snow to the scenario, then the same person taking the same route may be unable to get to the bus stop. It is not the snow alone that stops him; it is the interaction of the snow and the fact that the individual has a specific-impairment related condition that requires him to push a wheelchair through the snow that prevents the travel.

Inevitably, some judgment is required to distinguish between situations in which travel is prevented and situations in which it is merely made more difficult. In the Department's view, a case of “prevented travel” can be made not only where travel is literally impossible (e.g., someone cannot find the bus stop, someone cannot push a wheelchair through the foot of snow or up a steep hill) but also where the difficulties are so substantial that a reasonable person with the impairment-related condition in question would be deterred from making the trip.

The regulation makes the interaction between an impairment-related condition and the environmental barrier (whether distance, weather, terrain, or architectural barriers) the key to eligibility determinations. This is an individual determination. Depending on the specifics of their impairment-related condition, one individual may be able to get from his home to a bus stop under a given set of conditions, while his next-door neighbor may not.

Companions 

The ADA requires entities to provide paratransit to one person accompanying the eligible individual, with others served on a space-available basis. The one individual who is guaranteed space on the vehicle can be anyone—family member, business associate, friend, date, etc. The provider cannot limit the eligible individual's choice of type of companion. The transit authority may require that the eligible individual reserve a space for the companion when the individual reserves his or her own ride. This one individual rides even if this means that there is less room for other eligible individuals. Additional individuals beyond the first companion are carried only on a space available basis; that is, they do not displace other ADA paratransit eligible individuals.

A personal care attendant (i.e., someone designated or employed specifically to help the eligible individual meet his or her personal needs) always may ride with the eligible individual. If there is a personal care attendant on the trip, the eligible individual may still bring a companion, plus additional companions on a space available basis. The entity may require that, in reserving the trip, the eligible individual reserve the space for the attendant.

To prevent potential abuse of this provision, the rule provides that a companion (e.g., friend or family member) does not count as a personal care attendant unless the eligible individual regularly makes use of a personal care attendant and the companion is actually acting in that capacity. As noted under § 37.125, a provider may require that, as part of the initial eligibility certification process, an individual indicate whether he or she travels with a personal care attendant. If someone does not indicate the use of an attendant, then any individual accompanying him or her would be regarded simply as a companion.

To be viewed as “accompanying” the eligible individual, a companion must have the same origin and destination points as the eligible individual. In appropriate circumstances, entities may also wish to provide service to a companion who has either an origin or destination, but not both, with the eligible individual (e.g., the individual's date is dropped off at her own residence on the return trip from a concert).

Section 37.125 ADA Paratransit Eligibility—Process 

This section requires an eligibilty process to be established by each operator of complementary paratransit. The details of the process are to be devised through the planning and public participation process of this subpart. The process may not impose unreasonable administrative burdens on applicants, and, since it is part of the entity's nondiscrimination obligations, may not involve “user fees” or application fees to the applicant.

The process may include functional criteria related to the substantive eligibility criteria of § 37.123 and, where appropriate, functional evaluation or testing of applicants. The substantive eligibility process is not aimed at making a medical or diagnostic determination. While evaluation by a physician (or professionals in rehabilitation or other relevant fields) may be used as part of the process, a diagnosis of a disability is not dispositive. What is needed is a determination of whether, as a practical matter, the individual can use fixed route transit in his or her own circumstances. That is a transportation decision primarily, not a medical decision.

The goal of the process is to ensure that only people who meet the regulatory criteria, strictly applied, are regarded as ADA paratransit eligible. The Department recognizes that transit entities may wish to provide service to other persons, which is not prohibited by this rule. However, the eligibility process should clearly distinguish those persons who are ADA eligible from those who are provided service on other grounds. For example, eligibility documentation must clearly state whether someone is ADA paratransit eligible or eligible on some other basis.

Often, people tend to think of paratransit exclusively in terms of people with mobility impairments. Under the ADA, this is not accurate. Persons with visual impairments may be eligible under either the first or third eligibility categories. To accommodate them, all documents concerning eligibility must be made available in one or more accessible formats, on request. Accessible formats include computer disks, braille documents, audio cassettes, and large print documents. A document does not necessarily need to be made available in the format a requester prefers, but it does have to be made available in a format the person can use. There is no use giving a computer disk to someone who does not have a computer, for instance, or a braille document to a person who does not read braille.

When a person applies for eligibility, the entity will provide all the needed forms and instructions. These forms and instructions may include a declaration of whether the individual travels with a personal care attendant. The entity may make further inquiries concerning such a declaration (e.g., with respect to the individual's actual need for a personal care attendant).

When the application process is complete—all necessary actions by the applicant taken—the entity should process the application in 21 days. If it is unable to do so, it must begin to provide service to the applicant on the 22nd day, as if the application had been granted. Service may be terminated only if and when the entity denies the application. All determinations shall be in writing; in the case of a denial, reasons must be specified. The reasons must specifically relate the evidence in the matter to the eligibility criteria of this rule and of the entity's process. A mere recital that the applicant can use fixed route transit is not sufficient.

For people granted eligibility, the documentation of eligibility shall include at least the following information:

—The individual's name 

—The name of the transit provider 

—The telephone number of the entity's paratransit coordinator 

—An expiration date for eligibility 

—Any conditions or limitations on the individual's eligibility, including the use of a personal care attendant. 

The last point refers to the situation in which a person is eligible for some trips but not others. Or if the traveler is authorized to have a personal care attendant ride free of charge. For example, the documentation may say that the individual is eligible only when the temperature falls below a certain point, or when the individual is going to a destination not on an accessible bus route, or for non-work trips, etc.

As the mention of an expiration date implies, certification is not forever. The entity may recertify eligibility at reasonable intervals to make sure that changed circumstances have not invalidated or changed the individual's eligibility. In the Department's view, a reasonable interval for recertification is probably between one and three years. Less than one year would probably be too burdensome for consumers; over three years would begin to lose the point of doing recertifications. The recertification interval should be stated in the entity's plan. Of course, a user of the service can apply to modify conditions on his or her eligibility at any time.

The administrative appeal process is intended to give applicants who have been denied eligibility the opportunity to have their cases heard by some official other than the one who turned them down in the first place. In order to have appropriate separation of functions—a key element of administrative due process—not only must the same person not decide the case on appeal, but that person, to the extent practicable, should not have been involved in the first decision (e.g., as a member of the same office, or a supervisor or subordinate of the original decisionmaker). When, as in the case of a small transit operator, this degree of separation is not feasible, the second decisionmaker should at least be “bubbled” with respect to the original decision (i.e., not have participated in the original decision or discussed it with the original decisionmaker). In addition, there must be an opportunity to be heard in person as well as the chance to present written evidence and arguments. All appeals decisions must be in writing, stating the reasons for the decision.

To prevent the filing of stale claims, the entity may establish a 60 day “statute of limitations” on filing of appeals, the time starting to run on the date the individual is notified on the negative initial decision. After the appeals process has been completed (i.e., the hearing and/or written submission completed), the entity should make a decision within 30 days. If it does not, the individual must be provided service beginning the 31st day, until and unless an adverse decision is rendered on his or her appeal.

Under the eligibility criteria of the rule, an individual has a right to paratransit if he or she meets the eligibility criteria. As noted in the discussion of the nondiscrimination section, an entity may refuse service to anindividual with a disability who engages in violent, seriously disruptive, or illegal conduct, using the same standards for exclusion that would apply to any other person who acted in such an inappropriate way.

The rule also allows an entity to establish a process to suspend, for a reasonable period of time, the provision of paratransit service to an ADA eligible person who establishes a pattern or practice of missing scheduled trips. The purpose of this process would be to deter or deal with chronic “no-shows.” The sanction system—articulated criteria for the imposition of sanctions, length of suspension periods, details of the administrative process, etc.—would be developed through the public planning and participation process for the entity's paratransit plan, and the result reflected in the plan submission to FTA.

It is very important to note that sanctions could be imposed only for a “pattern or practice” of missed trips. A pattern or practice involves intentional, repeated or regular actions, not isolated, accidental, or singular incidents. Moreover, only actions within the control of the individual count as part of a pattern or practice. Missed trips due to operator error are not attributable to the individual passenger for this purpose. If the vehicle arrives substantially after the scheduled pickup time, and the passenger has given up on the vehicle and taken a taxi or gone down the street to talk to a neighbor, that is not a missed trip attributable to the passenger. If the vehicle does not arrive at all, or is sent to the wrong address, or to the wrong entrance to a building, that is not a missed trip attributable to the passenger. There may be other circumstances beyond the individual's control (e.g., a sudden turn for the worse in someone with a variable condition, a sudden family emergency) that make it impracticable for the individual to travel at the scheduled time and also for the individual to notify the entity in time to cancel the trip before the vehicle comes. Such circumstances also would not form part of a sanctionable pattern or practice.

Once an entity has certified someone as eligible, the individual's eligibility takes on the coloration of a property right. (This is not merely a theoretical statement. If one depends on transportation one has been found eligible for to get to a job, and the eligibility is removed, one may lose the job. The same can be said for access to medical care or other important services.) Consequently, before eligibility may be removed “for cause” under this provision, the entity must provide administrative due process to the individual.

If the entity proposes to impose sanctions on someone, it must first notify the individual in writing (using accessible formats where necessary). The notice must specify the basis of the proposed action (e.g., Mr. Smith scheduled trips for 8 a.m. on May 15, 2 p.m. on June 3, 9 a.m. on June 21, and 9:20 p.m. on July 10, and on each occasion the vehicle appeared at the scheduled time and Mr. Smith was nowhere to be found) and set forth the proposed sanction (e.g., Mr. Smith would not receive service for 15 days).

The entity would provide the individual an opportunity to be heard (i.e., an in-person informal hearing before a decisionmaker) as well as to present written and oral information and arguments. All relevant entity records and personnel would be made available to the individual, and other persons could testify. It is likely that, in many cases, an important factual issue would be whether a missed trip was the responsibility of the provider or the passenger, and the testimony of other persons and the provider's records or personnel are likely to be relevant in deciding this issue. While the hearing is intended to be informal, the individual could bring a representative (e.g., someone from an advocacy organization, an attorney).

The individual may waive the hearing and proceed on the basis of written presentations. If the individual does not respond to the notice within a reasonable time, the entity may make, in effect, a default finding and impose sanctions. If there is a hearing, and the individual needs paratransit service to attend the hearing, the entity must provide it. We would emphasize that, prior to a finding against the individual after this due process procedure, the individual must continue to receive service. The entity cannot suspend service while the matter is pending.

The entity must notify the individual in writing about the decision, the reasons for it, and the sanctions imposed, if any. Again, this information would be made available in accessible formats. In the case of a decision adverse to the individual, the administrative appeals process of this section would apply. The sanction would be stayed pending an appeal.

There are means other than sanctions, however, by which a transit provider can deal with a “no-show” problem in its system. Providers who use “real time scheduling” report that this technique is very effective in reducing no-shows and cancellations, and increasing the mix of real time scheduling in a system can probably be of benefit in this area. Calling the customer to reconfirm a reasonable time before pickup can head off some problems, as can educating consumers to call with cancellations ahead of time. Training of dispatch and operator personnel can help to avoid miscommunications that lead to missed trips.

Section 37.127 Complementary Paratransit for Visitors 

This section requires each entity having a complementary paratransit system to provide service to visitors from out of town on the same basis as it is provided to local residents. By “on the same basis,” we mean under all the same conditions, service criteria, etc., without distinction. For the period of a visit, the visitor is treated exactly like an eligible local user, without any higher priority being given to either.

A visitor is defined as someone who does not reside in the jurisdiction or jurisdictions served by the public entity or other public entities with which it coordinates paratransit service. For example, suppose a five-county metropolitan area provides coordinated paratransit service under a joint plan. A resident of any of the five counties would not be regarded as a visitor in any of them. Note that the rule talks in terms of “jurisdiction” rather than “service area.” If an individual lives in XYZ County, but outside the fixed route service area of that county's transit provider, the individual is still not a visitor for purposes of paratransit in PQR County, if PQR is one of the counties with which XYZ provides coordinated paratransit service.

A visitor can become eligible in one of two ways. The first is to present documentation from his or her “home” jurisdiction's paratransit system. The local provider will give “full faith and credit” to the ID card or other documentation from the other entity. If the individual has no such documentation, the local provider may require the provision of proof of visitor status (i.e., proof of residence somewhere else) and, if the individual's disability is not apparent, proof of the disability (e.g., a letter from a doctor or rehabilitation professional). Once this documentation is presented and is satisfactory, the local provider will make service available on the basis of the individual's statement that he or she is unable to use the fixed route transit system.

The local provider need serve someone based on visitor eligibility for no more than 21 days. After that, the individual is treated the same as a local person for eligibility purposes. This is true whether the 21 days are consecutive or parceled out over several shorter visits. The local provider may require the erstwhile visitor to apply for eligibility in the usual local manner. A visitor who expects to be around longer than 21 days should apply for regular eligibility as soon as he arrives. The same approach may be used for a service of requested visits totaling 21 days or more in a relating compact period of time. Preferably, this application process should be arranged before the visitor arrives, by letter, telephone or fax, so that a complete application can be processed expeditiously.

Section 37.129 Types of Service 

The basic mode of service for complementary paratransit is demand responsive, origin-to-destination service. This service may be provided for persons in any one of the three eligibility categories, and must always be provided to persons in the first category (e.g., people who cannot navigate the system). The local planning process should decide whether, or in what circumstances, this service is to be provided as door-to-door or curb-to-curb service.

For persons in the second eligibility category (e.g., persons who can use accessible buses, but do not have an accessible bus route available to take them to their destination), origin-to-destination service can be used. Alternatively, the entity can provide either of two other forms of service. One is on-call bus, in which the individual calls the provider and arranges for one or more accessible buses to arrive on the routes he needs to use at the appropriate time. On-call bus service must meet all the service criteria of § 37.131, except that on-call buses run only on fixed routes and the fare charged can be only the fixed route fare that anyone pays on the bus (including discounts).

The second option is “feeder paratransit” to an accessible fixed route that will take the individual to his or her destination. Feeder paratransit, again, would have to meet all the criteria of § 37.131. With respect to fares, the paratransit fare could be charged, but the individual would not be double charged for the trip. That is, having paid the paratransit fare, the transfer to the fixed route would be free.

For persons in the third eligibility category (e.g., persons who can use fixed route transit but who, because of a specific impairment-related condition, cannot get to or from a stop), the “feeder paratransit” option, under the conditions outlined above, is available. For some trips, it might be necessary to arrange for feeder service at both ends of the fixed route trip. Given the more complicated logistics of such arrangements, and the potential for a mistake that would seriously inconvenience the passenger, the transit provider should consider carefully whether such a “double feeder” system, while permissible, is truly workable in its system (as opposed to a simpler system that used feeder service only at one end of a trip when the bus let the person off at a place from which he or she could independently get to the destination). There may be some situations in which origin to destination service is easier and less expensive.

Section 37.131 Service Criteria for Complementary Paratransit Service Area 

The basic bus system service area is a corridor with a width of 3⁄4 of a mile on each side of each fixed route. At the end of a route, there is a semicircular “cap” on the corridor, consisting of a three-quarter mile radius from the end point of the route to the parallel sides of the corridor.

Complementary paratransit must provide service to any origin or destination point within a corridor fitting this description around any route in the bus system. Note that this does not say that an eligible user must live within a corridor in order to be eligible. If an individual lives outside the corridor, and can find a way of getting to a pickup point within the corridor, the service must pick him up there. The same holds true at the destination end of the trip.

Another concept involved in this service criterion is the core service area. Imagine a bus route map of a typical city. Color the bus routes and their corridors blue, against the white outline map. In the densely populated areas of the city, the routes (which, with their corridors attached, cut 11⁄2 mile swaths) merge together into a solid blue mass. There are few, if any, white spots left uncovered, and they are likely to be very small. Paratransit would serve all origins and destinations in the solid blue mass.

But what of the little white spots surrounded by various bus corridors? Because it would make sense to avoid providing service to such small isolated areas, the rule requires paratransit service there as well. So color them in too.

Outside the core area, though, as bus routes follow radial arteries into the suburbs and exurbs (we know real bus route maps are more complicated than this, but we simplify for purposes of illustration), there are increasingly wide white areas between the blue corridors, which may have corridors on either side of them but are not small areas completely surrounded by corridors. These white spaces are not part of the paratransit service area and the entity does not have to serve origins and destinations there. However, if, through the planning process, the entity wants to enlarge the width of one or more of the blue corridors from the 3⁄4 of a mile width, it can do so, to a maximum of 11⁄2 miles on each side of a route. The cost of service provided within such an expanded corridor can be counted in connection with an undue financial burden waiver request.

There may be a part of the service area where part of one of the corridors overlaps a political boundary, resulting in a requirement to serve origins and destinations in a neighboring jurisdiction which the entity lacks legal authority to service. The entity is not required to serve such origins and destinations, even though the area on the other side of the political boundary is within a corridor. This exception to the service area criterion does not automatically apply whenever there is a political boundary, only when there is a legal bar to the entity providing service on the other side of the boundary.

The rule requires, in this situation, that the entity take all practicable steps to get around the problem so that it can provide service throughout its service area. The entity should work with the state or local governments involved, via coordination plans, reciprocity agreements, memoranda of understanding or other means to prevent political boundaries from becoming barriers to the travel of individuals with disabilities.

The definition of the service area for rail systems is somewhat different, though many of the same concepts apply.

Around each station on the line (whether or not a key station), the entity would draw a circle with a radius of 3⁄4 mile. Some circles may touch or overlap. The series of circles is the rail system's service area. (We recognize that, in systems where stations are close together, this could result in a service area that approached being a corridor like that of a bus line.) The rail system would provide paratransit service from any point in one circle to any point in any other circle. The entity would not have to provide service to two points within the same circle, since a trip between two points in the vicinity of the same station is not a trip that typically would be taken by train. Nor would the entity have to provide service to spaces between the circles. For example, a train trip would not get close to point x; one would have to take a bus or other mode of transportation to get from station E or F to point x. A paratransit system comparable to the rail service area would not be required to take someone there either.

Rail systems typically provide trips that are not made, or cannot be made conveniently, on bus systems. For example, many rail systems cross jurisdictional boundaries that bus systems often do not. One can travel from Station A to a relatively distant Station E on a rail system in a single trip, while a bus trip between the same points, if possible at all, may involve a number of indirect routings and transfers, on two bus systems that may not interface especially well.

Rail operators have an obligation to provide paratransit equivalents of trips between circles to persons who cannot use fixed route rail systems because they cannot navigate the system, because key stations or trains are not yet accessible, or because they cannot access stations from points within the circles because of a specific impairment-related condition. For individuals who are eligible in category 2 because they need an accessible key station to use the system, the paratransit obligation extends only to transportation among “circles” centered on designated key stations (since, even when the key station plan is fully implemented, these individuals will be unable to use non-key stations).

It is not sufficient for a rail operator to refer persons with disabilities to an accessible bus system in the area. The obligation to provide paratransit for a rail system is independent of the operations of any bus system serving the same area, whether operated by the same entity that operates the rail system or a different entity. Obviously, it will be advantageous for bus and rail systems to coordinate their paratransit efforts, but a coordinated system would have to ensure coverage of trips comparable to rail trips that could not conveniently be taken on the fixed route bus system.

Response Time 

Under this provision, an entity must make its reservation service available during the hours its administrative offices are open. If those offices are open 9 to 5, those are the hours during which the reservations service must be open, even if the entity's transit service operated 6 a.m. to midnight. On days prior to a service day on which the administrative offices are not open at all (e.g., a Sunday prior to a Monday service day), the reservation service would also be open 9 to 5. Note that the reservation service on any day does not have to be provided directly by a “real person.” An answering machine or other technology can suffice.

Any caller reaching the reservation service during the 9 to 5 period, in this example, could reserve service for any time during the next 6 a.m. to 12 midnight service day. This is the difference between “next day scheduling” and a system involving a 24-hour prior reservation requirement, in which a caller would have to reserve a trip at 7 a.m. today if he or she wanted to travel at 7 a.m. tomorrow. The latter approach is not adequate under this rule.

The entity may use real time scheduling for all or part of its service. Like the Moliere character who spoke prose all his life without knowing it, many entities may already be using some real time scheduling (e.g., for return trips which are scheduled on a when-needed basis, as opposed to in advance). A number of transit providers who have used real time scheduling believe that it is more efficient on a per-trip basis and reduces cancellations and no-shows significantly. We encourage entities to consider this form of service.

Sometimes users want to schedule service well in advance, to be sure of traveling when they want to. The rule tells providers to permit reservations to be made as much as 14 days in advance. In addition, though an entity may negotiate with a user to adjust pickup and return trip times to make scheduling more efficient, the entity cannot insist on scheduling a trip more than one hour earlier or later than the individual desires to travel. Any greater deviation from desired trip would exceed the bounds of comparability.

Fares 

To calculate the proper paratransit fare, the entity would determine the route(s) that an individual would take to get from his or her origin to his or her destination on the fixed route system. At the time of day the person was traveling, what is the fare for that trip on those routes? Applicable charges like transfer fees or premium service charges may be added to the amount, but discounts (e.g., the half-fare discount for off-peak fixed route travel by elderly and handicapped persons) would not be subtracted. The transit provider could charge up to twice the resulting amount for the paratransit trip.

The mode through which paratransit is provided does not change the method of calculation. For example, if paratransit is provided via user side subsidy taxi service rather than publicly operated dial-a-ride van service, the cost to the user could still be only twice the applicable fixed route fare. The system operates the same regardless of whether the paratransit trip is being provided in place of a bus or a rail trip the user cannot make on the fixed route system. Where bus and rail systems are run by the same provider (or where the same bus provider runs parallel local and express buses along the same route), the comparison would be made to the mode on which a typical fixed route user would make the particular trip, based on schedule, length, convenience, avoidance of transfers, etc.

Companions are charged the same fare as the eligible individual they are accompanying. Personal care attendants ride free.

One exception to the fare requirement is made for social service agency (or other organization-sponsored) trips. This exception, which allows the transit provider to negotiate a price with the agency that is more than twice the relevant fixed route fare, applies to “agency trips,” by which we mean trips which are guaranteed to the agency for its use. That is, if an agency wants 12 slots for a trip to the mall on Saturday for clients with disabilities, the agency makes the reservation for the trips in its name, the agency will be paying for the transportation, and the trips are reserved to the agency, for whichever 12 people the agency designates, the provider may then negotiate any price it can with the agency for the trips. We distinguish this situation from one in which an agency employee, as a service, calls and makes an individual reservation in the name of a client, where the client will be paying for the transportation.

Restrictions and Priorities Based on Trip Purpose 

This is a simple and straightforward requirement. There can be no restrictions or priorities based on trip purpose in a comparable complementary paratransit system. When a user reserves a trip, the entity will need to know the origin, destination, time of travel, and how many people are traveling. The entity does not need to know why the person is traveling, and should not even ask.

Hours and Days of Service 

This criterion says simply that if a person can travel to a given destination using a given fixed route at a given time of day, an ADA paratransit eligible person must be able to travel to that same destination on paratransit at that time of day. This criterion recognizes that the shape of the service area can change. Late at night, for example, it is common for certain routes not to be run. Those routes, and their paratransit corridors, do not need to be served with paratransit when the fixed route system is not running on them. One couldn't get to destinations in that corridor by fixed route at those times, so paratransit service is not necessary either.

It should be pointed out that service during low-demand times need not be by the same paratransit mode as during higher usage periods. For example, if a provider uses its own paratransit vans during high demand periods, it could use a private contractor or user-side subsidy provider during low demand periods. This would presumably be a more efficient way of providing late night service. A call-forwarding device for communication with the auxiliary carrier during these low demand times would be perfectly acceptable, and could reduce administrative costs.

Capacity Constraints 

This provision specifically prohibits two common mechanisms that limit use of a paratransit system so as to constrain demand on its capacity. The first is a waiting list. Tyically, a waiting list involves a determination by a provider that it can provide service only to a given number of eligible persons. Other eligible persons are not able to receive service until one of the people being served moves away or otherwise no longer uses the service. Then the persons on the waiting list can move up. The process is analogous to the wait that persons in some cities have to endure to be able to buy season tickets to a sold-out slate of professional football games.

The second mechanism specifically mentioned is a number limit on the trips a passenger can take in a given period of time. It is a kind of rationing in which, for example, if one has taken his quota of 30 trips this month, he cannot take further trips for the rest of the month.

In addition, this paragraph prohibits any operational pattern or practice that significantly limits the availability of service of ADA paratransit eligible persons. As discussed under § 37.125 in the context of missed trips by passengers, a “pattern or practice” involves, regular, or repeated actions, not isolated, accidental, or singular incidents. A missed trip, late arrival, or trip denial now and then does not trigger this provision.

Operational problems outside the control of the entity do not count as part of a pattern or practice under this provision. For example, if the vehicle has an accident on the way to pick up a passenger, the late arrival would not count as part of a pattern or practice. If something that could not have been anticipated at the time the trip was scheduled (e.g., a snowstorm, an accident or hazardous materials incident that traps the paratransit vehicle, like all traffic on a certain highway, for hours), the resulting missed trip would not count as part of a pattern or practice. On the other hand, if the entity regularly does not maintain its vehicles well, such that frequent mechanical breakdowns result in missed trips or late arrivals, a pattern or practice may exist. This is also true in a situation in which scheduling practices fail to take into account regularly occurring traffic conditions (e.g., rush hour traffic jams), resulting in frequent late arrivals.

The rule mentions three specific examples of operational patterns or practices that would violate this provision. The first is a pattern or practice of substantial numbers of significantly untimely pickups (either for initial or return trips). To violate this provision, there must be both a substantial number of late arrivals and the late arrivals in question must be significant in length. For example, a DOT Inspector General's (IG) report on one city's paratransit system disclosed that around 30 percent of trips were between one and five hours late. Such a situation would trigger this provision. On the other hand, only a few instances of trips one to five hours late, or many instances of trips a few minutes late, would not trigger this provision.

The second example is substantial numbers of trip denials or missed trips. For example, if on a regular basis the reservation phone lines open at 5 a.m. and callers after 7 a.m. are all told that they cannot travel, or the phone lines shut down after 7 a.m. and a recorded message says to call back the next day, or the phone lines are always so busy that no one can get through, this provision would be triggered. (Practices of this kind would probably violate the response time criterion as well.) Also, if, on a regular basis, the entity misses a substantial number of trips (e.g., a trip is scheduled, the passenger is waiting, but the vehicle never comes, goes to the wrong address, is extremely late, etc.), it would violate this provision.

The third example is substantial numbers of trips with excessive trip lengths. Since paratransit is a shared ride service, paratransit rides between Point A and Point B will usually take longer, and involve more intermediate stops, than a taxi ride between the same two points. However, when the number of intermediate stops and the total trip time for a given passenger grows so large as to make use of the system prohibitively inconvenient, then this provision would be triggered. For example, the IG report referred to above mentioned a situation in which 9 percent of riders had one way trips averaging between two and four hours, with an average of 16 intermediate stops. Such a situation would probably trigger this provision.

Though these three examples probably cover the most frequently cited problems in paratransit operations that directly or indirectly limit the provision of service that is theoretically available to eligible persons, the list is not exhaustive. Other patterns or practices could trigger this provision. For example, the Department has heard about a situation in which an entity's paratransit contractor was paid on a per-trip basis, regardless of the length of the trip. The contractor therefore had an economic incentive to provide as many trips as possible. As a result, the contractor accepted short trips and routinely denied longer trips. This would be a pattern or practice contrary to this provision (and contrary to the service area provision as well).

Additional Service 

This provision emphasizes that entities may go beyond the requirements of this section in providing service to ADA paratransit individuals. For example, no one is precluded from offering service in a larger service area, during greater hours than the fixed route system, or without charge. However, costs of such additional service do not count with respect to undue financial burden waiver requests. Where a service criterion itself incorporates a range of actions the entity may take (e.g., providing wide corridors outside the urban core, using real time scheduling), however, costs of providing that optional service may be counted for undue financial burden waiver request purposes.

Section 37.133 Subscription Service 

As part of its paratransit service, an entity may include a subscription service component. However, at any given time of day, this component may not absorb more than 50 percent of available capacity on the total system. For example, if, at 8 a.m., the system can provide 400 trips, no more than 200 of these can be subscription trips.

The one exception to this rule would occur in a situation in which there is excess non-subscription capacity available. For example, if over a long enough period of time to establish a pattern, there were only 150 non-subscription trips requested at 8 a.m., the provider could begin to provide 250 subscription trips at that time. Subsequently, if non-subscription demand increased over a period of time, such that the 50 trips were needed to satisfy a regular non-subscription demand at that time, and overall system capacity had not increased, the 50 trips would have to be returned to the non-subscription category. During times of high subscription demand, entities could use the trip time negotiation discretion of § 37.131(c)(2) to shift some trips to other times.

Because subscription service is a limited subcomponent of paratransit service, the rule permits restrictions to be imposed on its use that could not be imposed elsewhere. There may be a waiting list for provision of subscription service or the use of other capacity constraints. Also, there may be restrictions or priorities based on trip purpose. For example, subscription service under peak work trip times could be limited to work trips. We emphasize that these limitations apply only to subscription service. It is acceptable for a provider to put a person on a waiting list for access to subscription service at 8 a.m. for work trips; the same person could not be wait-listed for access to paratransit service in general.

Section 37.135 Submission of Paratransit Plans 

This section contains the general requirements concerning the submission of paratransit plans. Each public entity operating fixed route service is required to develop and submit a plan for paratransit service. Where you send your plans depends on the type of entity you are. There are two categories of entities which should submit their plans to states—(1) FTA recipients and (2) entities who are administered by the state on behalf of FTA.

These FTA grantees submit their plans to the states because the agency would like the benefit of the states' expertise before final review. The states' role is as a commenter, not as a reviewer.

This section also specifies annual progress reports concerning the meeting of previously approved milestones, any slippage (with the reasons for it and plans to catch up), and any significant changes in the operator's environment, such as the withdrawal from the marketplace of a private paratransit provider or whose service the entity has relied upon to provide part of its paratransit service.

Paragraph (d) of this section specifies a maximum time period for the phase-in of the implementation of paratransit plans. The Department recognizes that it is not reasonable to expect paratransit systems to spring into existence fully formed, like Athena from the head of Zeus. Under this paragraph, all entities must be in full compliance with all paratransit provisions by January 26, 1997, unless the entity has received a waiver from FTA based on undue financial burden (which applies only to the service criteria of § 37.131, not to eligibility requirements or other paratransit provisions).

While the rule assumes that most entities will take a year to fully implement these provisions, longer than a year requires the paratransit plans to submit milestones that are susceptible to objective verification. Not all plans will be approved with a five-year lead-in period. Consistent with the proposed rule, the Department intends to look at each plan individually to see what is required for implementation in each case. DOT may approve only a shorter phase-in period in a given case.

Section 37.137 Paratransit Plan Development 

Section 35.137 establishes three principal requirements in the development of paratransit plans.

First is the requirement to survey existing paratransit services within the service area. This is required by section 223(c)(8) of the ADA. While the ADA falls short of explicitly requiring coordination, clearly this is one of the goals. The purpose of the survey is to determine what is being provided already, so that a transit provider can accurately assess what additional service is needed to meet the service criteria for comparable paratransit service. The plan does not have to discuss private paratransit providers whose services will not be used to help meet paratransit requirements under this rule. However, the public entity will need to know specifically what services are being provided by whom if the entity is to count the transportation toward the overall need.

Since the public entity is required to provide paratransit to all ADA paratransit eligible individuals, there is some concern that currently provided service may be cut back or eliminated. It is possible that this may happen and such action would have a negative effect on transportation provided to persons with disabilities in general. The Department urges each entity required to submit a plan to work with current providers of transportation, not only to determine what transportation services they provide, but also to continue to provide service into the foreseeable future.

Second, § 37.137 specifies requirements for public participation. First, the entity must perform outreach, to ensure that a wide range of persons anticipated to use the paratransit service know about and have the opportunity to participate in the development of the plan. Not only must the entity identify who these individuals or groups are, the entity also must contact the people at an early stage in the development process.

The other public participation requirements are straightforward. There must be a public hearing and an opportunity to comment. The hearing must be accessible to those with disabilities, and notice of the hearing must be accessible as well. There is a special efforts test identified in this paragraph for comments concerning a multi-year phase-in of a paratransit plan.

The final general requirement of the section specifies that efforts at public participation must be made permanent through some mechanism that provides for participation in all phases of paratransit plan development and submission. The Department is not requiring that there be an advisory committee established, although this is one method of institutionalizing participation. The Department is not as interested in the specific structure used to ensure public participation as we are interested in the effectiveness of the effort.

The Department believes that public participation is a key element in the effective implementation of the ADA. The ADA is an opportunity to develop programs that will ensure the integration of all persons into not just the transportation system of America, but all of the opportunities transportation makes possible. This opportunity is not without tremendous challenges to the transit providers. It is only through dialogue, over the long term, that usable, possible plans can be developed and implemented.

Section 37.139 Plan Contents 

This section contains substantive categories of information to be contained in the paratransit plan: Information on current and changing fixed route service; inventory of existing paratransit service; discussion of the discrepancies between existing paratransit and what is required under this regulation; a discussion of the public participation requirements and how they have been met; the plan for paratransit service; the budget for paratransit services; efforts to coordinate with other transportation providers; a description of the process in place or to be used to register ADA paratransit eligible individuals; a description of the documentation provided to each individual verifying eligibility; and a request for a waiver based on undue financial burden, if applicable. The final rule contains a reorganized and slightly expanded section on plan contents, reflecting requests to be more explicit, rather than less explicit.

The list of required elements is the same for all entities required to submit paratransit plans. There is no document length requirement, however. Each entity (or group plan) is unique and we expect the plans to reflect this. While we would like the plan elements presented in the order listed in this section, the contents most likely will vary greatly, depending on the size, geographic area, budget, complexity of issues, etc. of the particular submitting agency.

This section and § 37.139 provide for a maximum phase-in period of five years, with an assumed one-year phase-in for all paratransit programs. (The required budget has been changed to five years as well.) The Department has established a maximum five-year phase-in in the belief that not all systems will require that long, but that some, particularly those which had chosen to meet compliance with section 504 requirements with accessible fixed route service, may indeed need five years.

We are confident that, through the public participation process, entities can develop a realistic plan for full compliance with the ADA. To help ensure this, the paratransit plan contents section now requires that any plan which projects full compliance after January 26, 1993 must include milestones which can be measured and which result in steady progress toward full compliance. For example, it is possible that the first part of year one is used to ensure comprehensive registration of all eligible persons with disabilities, training of transit provider staffs and the development and dissemination of information to users and potential users in accessible formats and some modest increase in paratransit service is provided. A plan would not be permitted to indicate that no activity was possible in the first year, but proportionately more progress could be planned for later years than for the first year. Implementation must begin in January 1992.

Each plan, including its proposed phase-in period, will be the subject of examination by FTA. Not all providers who request a five-year phase-in will receive approval for a five-year phase-in. The plan must be careful, therefore, to explain what current services are, what the projections are, and what methods are in place to determine and provide accountability for progress toward full compliance.

We have been asked for assistance in assessing what the demand for paratransit service will be. FTA's ADA Paratransit Manual provides detailed assistance in this and many other areas of the plan development process.

The ADA itself contained a figure of 43 million persons with disabilities. It should be pointed out that many of these may not necessarily be eligible for ADA paratransit service. The Department's regulatory impact analysis discussing the probable costs involved in implementing this rule places the possible percentage of population who would be eligible for paratransit service at between 1.4 and 1.9 percent. This figure can vary depending on the type and variety of services you have available, or on such things as climate, proximity to medical care, family, etc. that a person with a disability may need. Clearly estimating demand is one of the most critical elements in the plan, since it will be used to make decisions about all of the various service criteria.

Section 37.139 contains a new paragraph (j), spelling out in more detail requirements related to the annual submission of plans. Since there is now the possibility for five-year phase-ins, the annual plan demonstrates the progress made to date, and explains any delays.

Section 37.141 Requirements If a Joint Plan is Submitted 

The Department believes that, particularly in large, multi-provider regions, a coordinated regional paratransit plan and system are extremely important. Such coordination can do much to ensure that the most comprehensive transportation can be provided with the most efficient use of available resources. We recognize that the effort of putting together such a coordinated system can be a lengthy one. This section is intended to facilitate the process of forming such a coordinated system.

If a number of entities wish to submit a joint plan for a coordinated system, they must, like other entities, submit a document by January 26, 1992. At a minimum, this document must include the following:

(1) A general statement that the participating entities intend to file a joint coordinated plan;

(2) A certification from each participating entity that it is committed to providing paratransit as a part of a coordinated plan;

(3) A certification from each participating entity that it will maintain at least current levels of paratransit service until the coordinated paratransit service called for by the joint plan is implemented;

(4) As many elements of the plan as possible.

These provisions ensure that significant planning will precede, and plan implementation will begin by, January 26, 1992, without precluding entities from cooperating because it was not possible to complete coordinating different public entities by that date. The entities involved in a joint plan are required to submit all elements of their plan by July 26, 1992.

The final provision in the section notes that an entity may later join a coordinated plan, even if it has filed its own plan on January 26, 1992. An entity must submit its own plan by January 26, 1992, if it has not provided a certification of participation in a joint plan.). In this case, the entity must provide the assurances and certifications required of all of the other participating entities.

The Department fully expects that many jurisdictions filing joint plans will be able to do so by January 26, 1992. For those who cannot, the regulatory provision ensures that there will be no decrease in paratransit service. Further, since we anticipate coordinated service areas to provide more effective service, complete implementation of a joint plan could be more rapid than if each entity was providing service on its own.

Entities submitting a joint plan do not have any longer than any other entities to fully implement complementary paratransit service. In any case, all plans (joint or single) must be fully implemented by January 26, 1997, absent a waiver for undue financial burden (which would, in the case of a joint plan, be considered on a joint basis).

Section 37.143 Paratransit Plan Implementation 

As already discussed under § 37.135, the states will receive FTA recipient plans for recipients of funding under 49 U.S.C. 5311 administered by the State or any small urbanized area recipient of funds under 49 U.S.C. 5307 administered by a state. Public entities who do not receive FTA funds will submit their plans directly to the applicable Regional Office (listed in appendix B to the rule).

The role of the state is to accept the plans on behalf of FTA, to ensure that all plans are submitted to it and forward the plans, with any comments on the plans, to FTA. This comment is very important for FTA to receive, since states administer these programs on behalf of FTA. Each state's specific knowledge of FTA grantees it administers will provide helpful information to FTA in making its decisions.

The rule lists five questions the states must answer when they forward the plans. These questions are gauged to capitalize on the working knowledge the states possess on the grantees. FTA will send a more specific letter of instruction to each state explaining its role.

Section 37.147 FTA Review of Plans 

This provision spells out factors FTA will consider in reviewing each plan, including whether the submission is complete, whether the plan complies with the substance of the ADA regulation, whether the entity complied with the public participation requirements in developing the plan, efforts by the entity to coordinate with other entities in a plan submission, and any comments submitted by the states.

These elements are not the only items that will be reviewed by FTA. Every portion of the plan will be reviewed and assessed for compliance with the regulation. This section merely highlights those provisions thought most important by the Department.

Section 37.151 Waiver for Undue Financial Burden 

The Department has adopted a five-year phase-in for paratransit service. Under this scheme, each entity required to provide paratransit service will be able to design a phase-in of its service specifically geared to local circumstances. While all jurisdictions will not receive approval for plans with a five year phase-in, each entity will be able to request what it needs based on local circumstances. Generally, the section allows an entity to request a wavier at any time it determines that it will not be able to meet a five-year phase-in or make measured progress toward its full compliance date specified in its original plan.

A waiver for undue financial burden should be requested if one of the following circumstances applies. First, when the entity submits its first plan on January 26, 1992, if the entity knows it will not be able to reach full compliance within five years, or if the entity cannot make measured progress the first year it may submit a waiver request. The entity also should apply for a waiver, if, during plan implementation, there are changed circumstances which make it unlikely that compliance will be possible.

The concept of measured progress should be given its plain meaning. It is not acceptable to submit a plan which shows significant progress in implementing a plan in years four and five, but no progress in years one and two. Similarly, the progress must be susceptible to objective verification. An entity cannot merely “work toward” developing a particular aspect of a plan.

The Department intends that undue burden waiver requests will be given close scrutiny, and waiver will not be granted highly. In reviewing requests, however, as the legislative history indicates, FTA will look at the individual financial constraints within which each public entity operates its fixed route system. “Any determination of undue financial burden cannot have assumed the collection of additional revenues, such as those received through increases in local taxes or legislative appropriations, which would not have otherwise been made available to the fixed route operator.” (H. Rept. 101-485, Pt. 1, at 31)

Section 37.153 FTA Waiver Determination 

If the FTA Administrator grants a waiver for undue financial burden, the waiver will be for a specified period of time and the Administrator will determine what the entity must do to meet its responsibilities under the ADA. Each determination will involve a judgment of what is appropriate on a case-by-case basis. Since each waiver will be granted based on individual circumstances, the Department does not deem it appropriate to specify a generally applicable duration for a waiver.

When a waiver is granted, the rule calls for entities to look first at limiting the number of trips provided to each individual as a means of providing service that does not create an undue burden. This capacity constraint, unlike manipulations of other service criteria, will not result in a degradation of the quality of service. An entity intending to submit an undue burden waiver request should take this approach into account in its planning process.

It should be noted that requiring an entity to provide paratransit service at least during core hours along key routes is one option that the Administrator has available in making a decision about the service to be provided. This requirement stems from the statutory provision that the Administrator can require the entity to provide a minimum level of service, even if to do so would be an undue financial burden. Certainly part of a request for a waiver could be a locally endorsed alternative to this description of basic service. The rule states explicitly the Administrator's discretion to return the application for more information if necessary.

Section 37.155 Factors in Decision To Grant an Undue Financial Burden Waiver 

Factors the Administrator will consider in making a decision whether to grant an undue financial burden waiver request include effects on current fixed route service, reductions in other services, increases in fares, resources available to implement complementary paratransit over the period of the plan, current level of accessible service (fixed route and paratransit), cooperation among transit providers, evidence of increased efficiencies that have been or could be used, any unique circumstances that may affect the entity's ability to provide paratransit service, the level of per capita service being provided, both to the population as a whole and what is being or anticipated to be provided to persons who are eligible and registered to receive ADA paratransit service.

This final element allows some measure of comparability, regardless of the specific service criteria and should assist in a general assessment of level of effort.

It is only the costs associated with providing paratransit service to ADA-paratransit eligible persons that can be counted in assessing whether or not there is an undue financial burden. Two cost factors are included in the considerations which enhance the Administrator's ability to assess real commitment to these paratransit provisions.

First, the Department will allow a statistically valid methodology for estimating number of trips mandated by the ADA. While the regulation calls for a trip-by-trip determination of eligibility, this provision recognizes that this is not possible for some systems, particularly the large systems. Since only those trips provided to a person when he or she is ADA eligible may be counted in determining an undue financial burden, this provision is necessary.

Second, in determining costs to be counted toward providing paratransit service, paragraph (b)(3) allows an entity to include in its paratransit budget dollars to which it is legally entitled, but which, as a matter of state or local funding arrangements, are provided to another entity that is actually providing the paratransit service.

For example, a state government may provide a certain formula allocation of the revenue from a certain tax to each jurisdiction for use in providing transportation service at the local level. The funds, depending on local arrangements, may flow either to a transit authority—a regulated entity under this rule—or to a city or county government. If the funds go to the transit authority, they clearly may be counted in an undue burden calculation. In addition, however, this provision also allows funds that flow through the city or county government to be counted in the undue burden calculation, since they are basically the same funds and should not be treated differently based on the accident of previously-determined local arrangements. On the other hand, this provision does not allow funds of a private non-profit or other organization who uses Department of Health and Human Services grant or private contributions to be counted toward the entity's financial commitment to paratransit.

Subpart G—Provision of Service 

Section 37.161 Maintenance of Accessible Features—General 

This section applies to all entities providing transportation services, public and private. It requires those entities to maintain in operative condition those features or facilities and equipment that make facilities and vehicles accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities.

The ADA requires that, to the maximum extent feasible, facilities be accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. This section recognizes that it is not sufficient to provide features such as lift-equipped vehicles, elevators, communications systems to provide information to people with vision or hearing impairments, etc. if these features are not maintained in a manner that enables individuals with disabilities to use them. Inoperative lifts or elevators, locked accessible doors, accessible paths of travel that are blocked by equipment or boxes of materials are not accessible to or usable by individuals with disabilities.

The rule points out that temporary obstructions or isolated instances of mechanical failure would not be considered violations of the ADA or this rule. Repairs must be made “promptly.” The rule does not, and probably could not, state a time limit for making particular repairs, given the variety of circumstances involved. However, repairing accessible features must be made a high priority. Allowing obstructions or out of order accessibility equipment to persist beyond a reasonable period of time would violate this Part, as would mechanical failures due to improper or inadequate maintenance. Failure of the entity to ensure that accessible routes are free of obstruction and properly maintained, or failure to arrange prompt repair of inoperative elevators, lifts, or other accessibility-related equipment, would also violate this part.

The rule also requires that accommodations be made to individuals with disabilities who would otherwise use an inoperative accessibility feature. For example, when a rail system discovers that an elevator is out of order, blocking access to one of its stations, it could accommodate users of the station by announcing the problem at other stations to alert passengers and offer accessible shuttle bus service around the temporarily inaccessible station. If a public address system were out of order, the entity could designate personnel to provide information to customers with visual impairments.

Section 37.163 Keeping Vehicle Lifts in Operative Condition—Public Entities 

This section applies only to public entities. Of course, like vehicle acquisition requirements and other provisions applying to public entities, these requirements also apply when private entities “stand in the shoes” of public entities in contracting situations, as provided in § 37.23.

This section's first requirement is that the entity establish a system of regular and frequent maintenance checks of lifts sufficient to determine if they are operative.

Vehicle and equipment maintenance is an important component of successful accessible service. In particular, an aggressive preventive maintenance program for lifts is essential. Lifts remain rather delicate pieces of machinery, with many moving parts, which often must operate in a harsh environment of potholes, dust and gravel, variations in temperature, snow, slush, and deicing compounds. It is not surprising that they sometimes break down.

The point of a preventive maintenance program is to prevent breakdowns, of course. But it is also important to catch broken lifts as soon as possible, so that they can be repaired promptly. Especially in a bus system with relatively low lift usage, it is possible that a vehicle could go for a number of days without carrying a passenger who uses the lift. It is highly undesirable for the next passenger who needs a lift to be the person who discovers that the lift is broken, when a maintenance check by the operator could have discovered the problem days earlier, resulting in its repair.

Therefore, the entity must have a system for regular and frequent checks, sufficient to determine if lifts are actually operative. This is not a requirement for the lift daily. (Indeed, it is not, as such, a requirement for lift cycling at all. If there is another means available of checking the lift, it may be used.) If alternate day checks, for example, are sufficient to determine that lifts are actually working, then they are permitted. If a lift is used in service on a given day, that may be sufficient to determine that the lift is operative with respect to the next day. It would be a violation of this part, however, for the entity to neglect to check lifts regularly and frequently, or to exhibit a pattern of lift breakdowns in service resulting in stranded passengers when the lifts had not been checked before the vehicle failed to provide required accessibility to passengers that day.

When a lift breaks down in service, the driver must let the entity know about the problem by the most immediate means available. If the vehicle is equipped with a radio or telephone, the driver must call in the problem on the spot. If not, then the driver would have to make a phone call at the first opportunity (e.g., from a phone booth during the turnaround time at the end of the run). It is not sufficient to wait until the end of the day and report the problem when the vehicle returns to the barn.

When a lift is discovered to be inoperative, either because of an in-service failure or as the result of a maintenance check, the entity must take the vehicle out of service before the beginning of its next service day (with the exception discussed below) and repair the lift before the vehicle is put back into service. In the case of an in-service failure, this means that the vehicle can continue its runs on that day, but cannot start a new service day before the lift is repaired. If a maintenance check in the evening after completion of a day's run or in the morning before a day's runs discloses the problem, then the bus would not go into service until the repair had taken place.

The Department realizes that, in the years before bus fleets are completely accessible, taking buses with lifts out of service for repairs in this way would probably result in an inaccessible spare bus being used on the route, but at least attention would have to be paid quickly to the lift repair, resulting in a quicker return to service of a working accessible bus.

The rule provides an exception for those situations in which there is no spare vehicle (either accessible or inaccessible) available to take the place of the vehicle with an operative lift, such that putting the latter vehicle into the shop would result in a reduction of service to the public (e.g., a scheduled run on a route could not be made). The Department would emphasize that the exception does not apply when there is any spare vehicle available.

Where the exception does apply, the provider may keep the vehicle with the inoperative lift in service for a maximum of three days (for providers operating in an area of over 50,000 population) or five days (for providers operating in an area of 50,000 population or less). After these times have elapsed, the vehicle must go into the shop, not to return until the lift is repaired. Even during the three- or five-day period, if an accessible spare bus becomes available at any time, it must be used in place of the bus with the inoperative lift or an inaccessible spare that is being used in its place.

In a fixed route system, if a bus is operating without a working lift (either on the day when the lift fails in service or as the result of the exception discussed above) and headways between accessible buses on the route on which the vehicle is operating exceed 30 minutes, the entity must accommodate passengers who would otherwise be inconvenienced by the lack of an accessible bus. This accommodation would be by a paratransit or other special vehicle that would pick up passengers with disabilities who cannot use the regular bus because its lift is inoperative. Passengers who need lifts in this situation would, in effect, be ADA paratransit eligible under the second eligibility category. However, since they would have no way of knowing that the bus they sought to catch would not be accessible that day, the transit authority must actively provide alternative service to them. This could be done, for example, by having a “shadow” accessible service available along the route or having the bus driver call in the minute he saw an accessible passenger he could not pick up (including the original passenger stranded by an in-service lift failure), with a short (i.e., less than 30-minute) response from an accessible vehicle dispatched to pick up the stranded passenger. To minimize problems in providing such service, when a transit authority is using the “no spare vehicles” exception, the entity could place the vehicle with the inoperative lift on a route with headways between accessible buses shorter than 30 minutes.

Section 37.165 Lift and Securement Use 

This provision applies to both public and private entities.

All people using wheelchairs, as defined in the rule, and other powered mobility devices, under the circumstances provided in the rule, are to be allowed to ride the entity's vehicles.

Entities may require wheelchair users to ride in designated securement locations. That is, the entity is not required to carry wheelchair users whose wheelchairs would have to park in an aisle or other location where they could obstruct other persons' passage or where they could not be secured or restrained. An entity's vehicle is not required to pick up a wheelchair user when the securement locations are full, just as the vehicle may pass by other passengers waiting at the stop if the bus is full.

The entity may require that wheelchair users make use of securement systems for their mobility devices. The entity, in other words, can require wheelchair users to “buckle up” their mobility devices. The entity is required, on a vehicle meeting part 38 standards, to use the securement system to secure wheelchairs as provided in that part. On other vehicles (e.g., existing vehicles with securement systems which do not comply with part 38 standards), the entity must provide and use a securement system to ensure that the mobility device remains within the securement area. This latter requirement is a mandate to use best efforts to restrain or confine the wheelchair to the securement area. The entity does the best it can, given its securement technology and the nature of the wheelchair. The Department encourages entities with relatively less adequate securement systems on their vehicles, where feasible, to retrofit the vehicles with better securement systems, that can successfully restrain a wide variety of wheelchairs. It is our understanding that the cost of doing so is not enormous.

An entity may not, in any case, deny transportation to a wheelchair and its user because the wheelchair cannot be secured or restrained by a vehicle's securement system, to the entity's satisfaction. The same point applies to an OPMD and its user, subject to legitimate safety requirements.

Entities have often recommended or required that a wheelchair user transfer out of his or her own device into a vehicle seat. Under this rule, it is no longer permissible to require such a transfer. The entity may provide information on risks and make a recommendation with respect to transfer, but the final decision on whether to transfer is up to the passenger.

The entity's personnel have an obligation to ensure that a passenger with a disability is able to take advantage of the accessibility and safety features on vehicles. Consequently, the driver or other personnel must provide assistance with the use of lifts, ramps, and securement devices. For example, the driver must deploy the lift properly and safely. If the passenger cannot do so independently, the driver must assist the passenger with using the securement device. On a vehicle which uses a ramp for entry, the driver may have to assist in pushing a manual wheelchair up the ramp (particularly where the ramp slope is relatively steep). All these actions may involve a driver leaving his seat. Even in entities whose drivers traditionally do not leave their seats (e.g., because of labor-management agreements or company rules), this assistance must be provided. This rule overrides any requirements to the contrary.

Wheelchair users, especially those using electric wheelchairs, often have a preference for entering a lift platform and vehicle in a particular direction (e.g., backing on or going on frontwards). Except where the only way of successfully maneuvering a device onto a vehicle or into its securement area or an overriding safety concern (i.e., a direct threat) requires one way of doing this or another, the transit provider should respect the passenger's preference. We note that most electric wheelchairs are usually not equipped with rearview mirrors, and that many persons who use them are not able to rotate their heads sufficiently to see behind. People using canes or walkers and other standees with disabilities who do not use wheelchairs but have difficulty using steps (e.g., an elderly person who can walk on a level surface without use of a mobility aid but cannot raise his or her legs sufficiently to climb bus steps) must also be permitted to use the lift, on request.

A lift conforming to Access Board requirements has a platform measuring at least 30″ × 48″, with a design load of at least 600 pounds (i.e., capable of lifting a wheelchair/occupant combination of up to 600 pounds). Working parts upon which the lift depends for support of the load, such as cables, pulleys, and shafts, must have a safety factor of at least six times the design load; nonworking parts such as the platform, frame, and attachment hardware, which would not be expected to wear, must have a safety factor of at least three times the design load.

If a transportation provider has a vehicle and equipment that meets or exceeds standards based on Access Board guidelines, and the vehicle and equipment can in fact safely accommodate a given wheelchair, then it is not appropriate, under disability nondiscrimination law, for the transportation provider to refuse to transport the device and its user. Transportation providers must carry a wheelchair and its user, as long as the lift can accommodate the size and weight of the wheelchair and its user and there is space for the wheelchair on the vehicle. However, if in fact a lift or vehicle is unable to accommodate the wheelchair and its user, the transportation provider is not required to carry it.

For example, suppose that a bus or paratransit vehicle lift will safely accommodate an 800-pound wheelchair/passenger combination, but not a combination exceeding 800 pounds (i.e., a design load of 800 lbs.). The lift is one that exceeds the part 38 design standard, which requires lifts to be able to accommodate a 600-pound wheelchair/passenger combination. The transportation provider could limit use of that lift to a combination of 800 pounds or less. Likewise, if a wheelchair or its attachments extends beyond the 30 × 48 inch footprint found in part 38's design standards but fits onto the lift and into the wheelchair securement area of the vehicle, the transportation provider would have to accommodate the wheelchair. However, if such a wheelchair was of a size that would block an aisle and interfere with the safe evacuation of passengers in an emergency, the operator could deny carriage of that wheelchair based on a legitimate safety requirement.

Section 37.167 Other Service Requirements 

The requirements in this section apply to both public and private entities.

On fixed route systems, the entity must announce stops. These stops include transfer points with other fixed routes. This means that any time a vehicle is to stop where a passenger can get off and transfer to another bus or rail line (or to another form of transportation, such as commuter rail or ferry), the stop would be announced. The announcement can be made personally by the vehicle operator or can be made by a recording system. If the vehicle is small enough so that the operator can make himself or herself heard without a P.A. system, it is not necessary to use the system.

Announcements also must be made at major intersections or destination points. The rule does not define what major intersections or destination points are. This is a judgmental matter best left to the local planning process. In addition, the entity must make announcements at sufficient intervals along a route to orient a visually impaired passenger to his or her location. The other required announcements may serve this function in many instances, but if there is a long distance between other announcements, fill-in orientation announcements would be called for. The entity must announce any stop requested by a passenger with a disability, even if it does not meet any of the other criteria for announcement.

When vehicles from more than one route serve a given stop or station, the entity must provide a means to assist an individual with a visual impairment or other disability in determining which is the proper vehicle to enter. Some entities have used external speakers. FTA is undertaking a study to determine what is the best available technology in this area. Some transit properties have used colored mitts, or numbered cards, to allow passengers to inform drivers of what route they wanted to use. The idea is to prevent, at a stop where vehicles from a number of routes arrive, a person with a visual impairment from having to ask every driver whether the bus is the right one. The rule does not prescribe what means is to be used, only that some effective means be provided.

Service animals shall always be permitted to accompany their users in any private or public transportation vehicle or facility. One of the most common misunderstandings about service animals is that they are limited to being guide dogs for persons with visual impairments. Dogs are trained to assist people with a wide variety of disabilities, including individuals with hearing and mobility impairments. Other animals (e.g., monkeys) are sometimes used as service animals as well. In any of these situations, the entity must permit the service animal to accompany its user.

Part 38 requires a variety of accessibility equipment. This section requires that the entity use the equipment it has. For example, it would be contrary to this provision for a transit authority to bolt its bus lifts shut because transit authority had difficulty maintaining the lifts. It does little good to have a public address system on a vehicle if the operator does not use it to make announcements (except, as noted above, in the situation where the driver can make himself or herself heard without recourse to amplification.)

Entities must make communications and information available, using accessible formats and technology (e.g., Braille, large print, TDDs) to obtain information about transportation services. Someone cannot adequately use the bus system if schedule and route information is not available in a form he or she can use. If there is only one phone line on which ADA paratransit eligible individuals can reserve trips, and the line is chronically busy, individuals cannot schedule service. Such obstacles to the use of transportation service are contrary to this section. (The latter could, in some circumstances, be viewed as a capacity constraint.)

It is inconsistent with this section for a transit provider to refuse to let a passenger use a lift at any designated stop, unless the lift is physically unable to deploy or the lift would be damaged if it did deploy (see discussion under § 37.123). In addition, if a temporary situation at the stop (e.g., construction, an accident, a landslide) made the stop unsafe for anyone to use, the provider could decline to operate the lift there (just as it refused to open the door for other passengers at the same point). The provider could not, however, declare a stop “off limits” to persons with disabilities that is used for other persons. If the transit authority has concerns about barriers or safety hazards that peculiarly affect individuals with disabilities that would use the stop, it should consider making efforts to move the stop.

Under DOT hazardous materials rules, a passenger may bring a portable medical oxygen supply on board a vehicle. Since the hazardous materials rules permit this, transit providers cannot prohibit it. For further information on hazardous materials rules, as they may affect transportation of assistive devices, entities may contact the Department's Research and Special Programs Administration, Office of Hazardous Materials Transportation (202-366-0656).

One concern that has been expressed is that transportation systems (particularly some rail systems) may make it difficult for persons with disabilities to board or disembark from vehicles by very rapidly closing doors on the vehicles before individuals with disabilities (who may move more slowly through crowds in the vehicle or platform than other persons) have a chance to get on or off the vehicle. Doing so is contrary to the rule; operators must make appropriate provision to give individuals with disabilities adequate time to board or disembark.

Section 37.169 Interim Requirements for Over-the-Road Bus Service Operated by Private Entities 

Private over-the-road bus (OTRB) service is, first of all, subject to all the other private entity requirements of the rule. The requirements of this section are in addition to the other applicable provisions.

Boarding assistance is required. The Department cannot require any particular boarding assistance devices at this time. Each operator may decide what mode of boarding assistance is appropriate for its operation. We agree with the discussion in the DOJ Title II rule's preamble that carrying is a disfavored method of providing assistance to an individual with a disability. However, since accessible private OTRBs cannot be required by this rule, there may be times when carrying is the only available means of providing access to an OTRB, if the entity does not exercise its discretion to provide an alternative means. It is required by the rule that any employee who provides boarding assistance—above all, who may carry or otherwise directly physically assist a passenger—must be trained to provide this assistance appropriately and safely.

The baggage priority provision for wheelchairs and other assistive devices involves a similar procedure to that established in the Department's Air Carrier Access Act rule (14 CFR part 382). In brief, it provides that, at any given stop, a person with a wheelchair or other assistive device would have the device loaded before other items at this stop. An individual traveling with a wheelchair is not similarly situated to a person traveling with luggage. For the wheelchair user, the wheelchair is an essential mobility device, without which travel is impossible. The rationale of this provision is that, while no one wants his or her items left behind, carrying the wheelchair is more important to its user than ordinary luggage to a traveler. If it comes to an either/or choice (the wheelchair user's luggage would not have any priority over other luggage, however). There would be no requirement, under this provision, for “bumping” baggage already on the bus from previous stops in order to make room for the wheelchair.

The entity could require advance notice from a passenger in only one circumstance. If a passenger needed boarding assistance, the entity could require up to 48 hours' advance notice for the purpose of providing needed assistance. While advance notice requirements are generally undesirable, this appears to be a case in which a needed accommodation may be able to be provided successfully only if the transportation provider knows in advance that some extra staffing is needed to accomplish it. While the primary need for advance notice appears to be in the situation of an unstaffed station, there could be other situations in which advance notice was needed in order to ensure that the accommodation could be made. Entities should not ask for advance notice in all cases, but just in those cases in which it is really needed for this purpose. Even if advance notice is not provided, the entity has the obligation to provide boarding assistance if it can be provided with available staff.

Section 37.171 Equivalency Requirement for Demand Responsive Service Operated by Private Entities Not Primarily in the Business of Transporting People 

This provision is a service requirement closely related to the private entity requirements for §§ 37.101-37.105 of this part. Entities in this category are always required to provide equivalent service, regardless of what they are doing with respect to the acquisition of vehicles. The effect of this provision may be to require some entities to arrange, either through acquiring their own accessible vehicles or coordinating with other providers, to have accessible vehicles available to meet the equivalency standards of § 37.105 or otherwise to comply with those standards.

Section 37.173 Training 

A well-trained workforce is essential in ensuring that the accessibility-related equipment and accommodations required by the ADA actually result in the delivery of good transportation service to individuals with disabilities. The utility of training was recognized by Congress as well. (See S. Rept. 100-116 at 48.) At the same time, we believe that training should be conducted in an efficient and effective manner, with appropriate flexibility allowed to the organizations that must carry it out. Each transportation provider is to design a training program which suits the needs of its particular operation. While we are confident of this approach, we are mindful that the apparent lack of training has been a source of complaint to FTA and transit providers. Good training is difficult and it is essential.

Several points of this section deserve emphasis. First, the requirements for training apply to private as well as to public providers, of demand responsive as well as of fixed route service. Training is just as necessary for the driver of a taxicab, a hotel shuttle, or a tour bus as it is for a driver in an FTA-funded city bus system.

Second, training must be to proficiency. The Department is not requiring a specific course of training or the submission of a training plan for DOT approval. However, every employee of a transportation provider who is involved with service to persons with disabilities must have been trained so that he or she knows what needs to be done to provide the service in the right way. When it comes to providing service to individuals with disabilities, ignorance is no excuse for failure.

While there is no specific requirement for recurrent or refresher training, there is an obligation to ensure that, at any given time, employees are trained to proficiency. An employee who has forgotten what he was told in past training sessions, so that he or she does not know what needs to be done to serve individuals with disabilities, does not meet the standard of being trained to proficiency.

Third, training must be appropriate to the duties of each employee. A paratransit dispatcher probably must know how to use a TDD and enough about various disabilities to know what sort of vehicle to dispatch. A bus driver must know how to operate lifts and securement devices properly. A mechanic who works on lifts must know how to maintain them. Cross-training, while useful in some instances, is not required, so long as each employee is trained to proficiency in what he or she does with respect to service to individuals with disabilities.

Fourth, the training requirement goes both to technical tasks and human relations. Employees obviously need to know how to run equipment the right way. If an employee will be assisting wheelchair users in transferring from a wheelchair to a vehicle seat, the employee needs training in how to do this safely. But every public contact employee also has to understand the necessity of treating individuals with disabilities courteously and respectfully, and the details of what that involves.

One of the best sources of information on how best to train personnel to interact appropriately with individuals with disabilities is the disability community itself. Consequently, the Department urges entities to consult with disability organizations concerning how to train their personnel. Involving these groups in the process of establishing training programs, in addition to providing useful information, should help to establish or improve working relationships among transit providers and disability groups that, necessarily, will be of long duration. We note that several transit providers use persons with disabilities to provide the actual training. Others have reported that role playing is an effective method to instill an appreciation of the particular perspective of one traveling with a disability.

Finally, one of the important points in training concerns differences among individuals with disabilities. All individuals with disabilities, of course, are not alike. The appropriate ways one deals with persons with various kinds of disabilities (e.g., mobility, vision, hearing, or mental impairments) are likely to differ and, while no one expects bus drivers to be trained as disability specialists, recognizing relevant differences and responding to them appropriately is extremely significant. Public entities who contract with private entities to have service provided—above all, complementary paratransit—are responsible for ensuring that contractor personnel receive the appropriate training.


PART 38—AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA) ACCESSIBILITY SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES

Authority:42 U.S.C. 12101-12213; 49 U.S.C. 322.

Source:56 FR 45756, Sept. 6, 1991, unless otherwise noted.

Subpart A—General

§ 38.1 Purpose.

This part provides minimum guidelines and requirements for accessibility standards in part 37 of this title for transportation vehicles required to be accessible by the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 1201 et seq.).

§ 38.2 Equivalent facilitation.

Departures from particular technical and scoping requirements of these guidelines by use of other designs and technologies are permitted where the alternative designs and technologies used will provide substantially equivalent or greater access to and usability of the vehicle. Departures are to be considered on a case-by-case basis under procedures set forth in § 37.7 of this title.

§ 38.3 Definitions.

See § 37.3 of this title.

§ 38.4 Miscellaneous instructions.

(a) Dimensional conventions.  Dimensions that are not noted as minimum or maximum are absolute.

(b) Dimensional tolerances.  All dimensions are subject to conventional engineering tolerances for material properties and field conditions, including normal anticipated wear not exceeding accepted industry-wide standards and practices.

(c) Notes.  The text of these guidelines does not contain notes or footnotes. Additional information, explanations, and advisory materials are located in the Appendix.

(d) General terminology. (1) Comply with  means meet one or more specification of these guidelines.

(2) If or if * * * then  denotes a specification that applies only when the conditions described are present.

(3) May  denotes an option or alternative.

(4) Shall  denotes a mandatory specification or requirement.

(5) Should  denotes an advisory specification or recommendation.

Subpart B—Buses, Vans and Systems

§ 38.21 General.

(a) New, used or remanufactured buses and vans (except over-the-road buses covered by subpart G of this part), to be considered accessible by regulations in part 37 of this title shall comply with the applicable provisions of this subpart.

(b) If portions of the vehicle are modified in a way that affects or could affect accessibility, each such portion shall comply, to the extent practicable, with the applicable provisions of this subpart. This provision does not require that inaccessible buses be retrofitted with lifts, ramps or other boarding devices.

§ 38.23 Mobility aid accessibility.

(a) General.  All vehicles covered by this subpart shall provide a level-change mechanism or boarding device (e.g., lift or ramp) complying with paragraph (b) or (c) of this section and sufficient clearances to permit a wheelchair or other mobility aid user to reach a securement location. At least two securement locations and devices, complying with paragraph (d) of this section, shall be provided on vehicles in excess of 22 feet in length; at least one securement location and device, complying with paragraph (d) of this section, shall be provided on vehicles 22 feet in length or less.

(b) Vehicle lift —(1) Design load.  The design load of the lift shall be at least 600 pounds. Working parts, such as cables, pulleys, and shafts, which can be expected to wear, and upon which the lift depends for support of the load, shall have a safety factor of at least six, based on the ultimate strength of the material. Nonworking parts, such as platform, frame, and attachment hardware which would not be expected to wear, shall have a safety factor of at least three, based on the ultimate strength of the material.

(2) Controls —(i) Requirements.  The controls shall be interlocked with the vehicle brakes, transmission, or door, or shall provide other appropriate mechanisms or systems, to ensure that the vehicle cannot be moved when the lift is not stowed and so the lift cannot be deployed unless the interlocks or systems are engaged. The lift shall deploy to all levels (i.e., ground, curb, and intermediate positions) normally encountered in the operating environment. Where provided, each control for deploying, lowering, raising, and stowing the lift and lowering the roll-off barrier shall be of a momentary contact type requiring continuous manual pressure by the operator and shall not allow improper lift sequencing when the lift platform is occupied. The controls shall allow reversal of the lift operation sequence, such as raising or lowering a platform that is part way down, without allowing an occupied platform to fold or retract into the stowed position.

(ii) Exception.  Where the lift is designed to deploy with its long dimension parallel to the vehicle axis and which pivots into or out of the vehicle while occupied (i.e., “rotary lift”), the requirements of this paragraph prohibiting the lift from being stowed while occupied shall not apply if the stowed position is within the passenger compartment and the lift is intended to be stowed while occupied.

(3) Emergency operation.  The lift shall incorporate an emergency method of deploying, lowering to ground level with a lift occupant, and raising and stowing the empty lift if the power to the lift fails. No emergency method, manual or otherwise, shall be capable of being operated in a manner that could be hazardous to the lift occupant or to the operator when operated according to manufacturer's instructions, and shall not permit the platform to be stowed or folded when occupied, unless the lift is a rotary lift and is intended to be stowed while occupied.

(4) Power or equipment failure.  Platforms stowed in a vertical position, and deployed platforms when occupied, shall have provisions to prevent their deploying, falling, or folding any faster than 12 inches/second or their dropping of an occupant in the event of a single failure of any load carrying component.

(5) Platform barriers.  The lift platform shall be equipped with barriers to prevent any of the wheels of a wheelchair or mobility aid from rolling off the platform during its operation. A movable barrier or inherent design feature shall prevent a wheelchair or mobility aid from rolling off the edge closest to the vehicle until the platform is in its fully raised position. Each side of the lift platform which extends beyond the vehicle in its raised position shall have a barrier a minimum 11⁄2 inches high. Such barriers shall not interfere with maneuvering into or out of the aisle. The loading-edge barrier (outer barrier) which functions as a loading ramp when the lift is at ground level, shall be sufficient when raised or closed, or a supplementary system shall be provided, to prevent a power wheelchair or mobility aid from riding over or defeating it. The outer barrier of the lift shall automatically raise or close, or a supplementary system shall automatically engage, and remain raised, closed, or engaged at all times that the platform is more than 3 inches above the roadway or sidewalk and the platform is occupied. Alternatively, a barrier or system may be raised, lowered, opened, closed, engaged, or disengaged by the lift operator, provided an interlock or inherent design feature prevents the lift from rising unless the barrier is raised or closed or the supplementary system is engaged.

(6) Platform surface.  The platform surface shall be free of any protrusions over 1⁄4 inch high and shall be slip resistant. The platform shall have a minimum clear width of 281⁄2 inches at the platform, a minimum clear width of 30 inches measured from 2 inches above the platform surface to 30 inches above the platform, and a minimum clear length of 48 inches measured from 2 inches above the surface of the platform to 30 inches above the surface of the platform. (See Fig. 1)

(7) Platform gaps.  Any openings between the platform surface and the raised barriers shall not exceed 5⁄8 inch in width. When the platform is at vehicle floor height with the inner barrier (if applicable) down or retracted, gaps between the forward lift platform edge and the vehicle floor shall not exceed 1⁄2 inch horizontally and 5⁄8 inch vertically. Platforms on semi-automatic lifts may have a hand hold not exceeding 11⁄2 inches by 41⁄2 inches located between the edge barriers.

(8) Platform entrance ramp.  The entrance ramp, or loading-edge barrier used as a ramp, shall not exceed a slope of 1:8, measured on level ground, for a maximum rise of 3 inches, and the transition from roadway or sidewalk to ramp may be vertical without edge treatment up to 1⁄4 inch. Thresholds between 1⁄4 inch and 1⁄2 inch high shall be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2.

(9) Platform deflection.  The lift platform (not including the entrance ramp) shall not deflect more than 3 degrees (exclusive of vehicle roll or pitch) in any direction between its unloaded position and its position when loaded with 600 pounds applied through a 26 inch by 26 inch test pallet at the centroid of the platform.

(10) Platform movement.  No part of the platform shall move at a rate exceeding 6 inches/second during lowering and lifting an occupant, and shall not exceed 12 inches/second during deploying or stowing. This requirement does not apply to the deployment or stowage cycles of lifts that are manually deployed or stowed. The maximum platform horizontal and vertical acceleration when occupied shall be 0.3g.

(11) Boarding direction.  The lift shall permit both inboard and outboard facing of wheelchair and mobility aid users.

(12) Use by standees.  Lifts shall accommodate persons using walkers, crutches, canes or braces or who otherwise have difficulty using steps. The platform may be marked to indicate a preferred standing position.

(13) Handrails.  Platforms on lifts shall be equipped with handrails on two sides, which move in tandem with the lift, and which shall be graspable and provide support to standees throughout the entire lift operation. Handrails shall have a usable component at least 8 inches long with the lowest portion a minimum 30 inches above the platform and the highest portion a maximum 38 inches above the platform. The handrails shall be capable of withstanding a force of 100 pounds concentrated at any point on the handrail without permanent deformation of the rail or its supporting structure. The handrail shall have a cross-sectional diameter between 11⁄4 inches and 11⁄2 inches or shall provide an equivalent grasping surface, and have eased edges with corner radii of not less than 1⁄8 inch. Handrails shall be placed to provide a minimum 11⁄2 inches knuckle clearance from the nearest adjacent surface. Handrails shall not interfere with wheelchair or mobility aid maneuverability when entering or leaving the vehicle.

(c) Vehicle ramp —(1) Design load.  Ramps 30 inches or longer shall support a load of 600 pounds, placed at the centroid of the ramp distributed over an area of 26 inches by 26 inches, with a safety factor of at least 3 based on the ultimate strength of the material. Ramps shorter than 30 inches shall support a load of 300 pounds.

(2) Ramp surface.  The ramp surface shall be continuous and slip resistant; shall not have protrusions from the surface greater than 1⁄4 inch high; shall have a clear width of 30 inches; and shall accommodate both four-wheel and three-wheel mobility aids.

(3) Ramp threshold.  The transition from roadway or sidewalk and the transition from vehicle floor to the ramp may be vertical without edge treatment up to 1⁄4 inch. Changes in level between 1⁄4 inch and 1⁄2 inch shall be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2.

(4) Ramp barriers.  Each side of the ramp shall have barriers at least 2 inches high to prevent mobility aid wheels from slipping off.

(5) Slope.  Ramps shall have the least slope practicable and shall not exceed 1:4 when deployed to ground level. If the height of the vehicle floor from which the ramp is deployed is 3 inches or less above a 6-inch curb, a maximum slope of 1:4 is permitted; if the height of the vehicle floor from which the ramp is deployed is 6 inches or less, but greater than 3 inches, above a 6-inch curb, a maximum slope of 1:6 is permitted; if the height of the vehicle floor from which the ramp is deployed is 9 inches or less, but greater than 6 inches, above a 6-inch curb, a maximum slope of 1:8 is permitted; if the height of the vehicle floor from which the ramp is deployed is greater than 9 inches above a 6-inch curb, a slope of 1:12 shall be achieved. Folding or telescoping ramps are permitted provided they meet all structural requirements of this section.

(6) Attachment.  When in use for boarding or alighting, the ramp shall be firmly attached to the vehicle so that it is not subject to displacement when loading or unloading a heavy power mobility aid and that no gap between vehicle and ramp exceeds 5⁄8 inch.

(7) Stowage.  A compartment, securement system, or other appropriate method shall be provided to ensure that stowed ramps, including portable ramps stowed in the passenger area, do not impinge on a passenger's wheelchair or mobility aid or pose any hazard to passengers in the event of a sudden stop or maneuver.

(8) Handrails.  If provided, handrails shall allow persons with disabilities to grasp them from outside the vehicle while starting to board, and to continue to use them throughout the boarding process, and shall have the top between 30 inches and 38 inches above the ramp surface. The handrails shall be capable of withstanding a force of 100 pounds concentrated at any point on the handrail without permanent deformation of the rail or its supporting structure. The handrail shall have a cross-sectional diameter between 11⁄4 inches and 11⁄2 inches or shall provide an equivalent grasping surface, and have eased edges with corner radii of not less than 1⁄8 inch. Handrails shall not interfere with wheelchair or mobility aid maneuverability when entering or leaving the vehicle.

(d) Securement devices —(1) Design load.  Securement systems on vehicles with GVWRs of 30,000 pounds or above, and their attachments to such vehicles, shall restrain a force in the forward longitudinal direction of up to 2,000 pounds per securement leg or clamping mechanism and a minimum of 4,000 pounds for each mobility aid. Securement systems on vehicles with GVWRs of up to 30,000 pounds, and their attachments to such vehicles, shall restrain a force in the forward longitudinal direction of up to 2,500 pounds per securement leg or clamping mechanism and a minimum of 5,000 pounds for each mobility aid.

(2) Location and size.  The securement system shall be placed as near to the accessible entrance as practicable and shall have a clear floor area of 30 inches by 48 inches. Such space shall adjoin, and may overlap, an access path. Not more than 6 inches of the required clear floor space may be accommodated for footrests under another seat provided there is a minimum of 9 inches from the floor to the lowest part of the seat overhanging the space. Securement areas may have fold-down seats to accommodate other passengers when a wheelchair or mobility aid is not occupying the area, provided the seats, when folded up, do not obstruct the clear floor space required. (See Fig. 2)

(3) Mobility aids accommodated.  The securement system shall secure common wheelchairs and mobility aids and shall either be automatic or easily attached by a person familiar with the system and mobility aid and having average dexterity.

(4) Orientation.  In vehicles in excess of 22 feet in length, at least one securement device or system required by paragraph (a) of this section shall secure the wheelchair or mobility aid facing toward the front of the vehicle. Additional securement devices or systems shall secure the wheelchair or mobility aid facing forward, or rearward with a padded barrier, extending from a height of 38 inches from the vehicle floor to a height of 56 inches from the vehicle floor with a width of 18 inches, laterally centered immediately in back of the seated individual. In vehicles 22 feet in length or less, the required securement device may secure the wheelchair or mobility aid either facing toward the front of the vehicle or facing rearward, with a padded barrier as described. Additional securement locations shall be either forward or rearward facing with a padded barrier. Such barriers need not be solid provided equivalent protection is afforded.

(5) Movement.  When the wheelchair or mobility aid is secured in accordance with manufacturer's instructions, the securement system shall limit the movement of an occupied wheelchair or mobility aid to no more than 2 inches in any direction under normal vehicle operating conditions.

(6) Stowage.  When not being used for securement, or when the securement area can be used by standees, the securement system shall not interfere with passenger movement, shall not present any hazardous condition, shall be reasonably protected from vandalism, and shall be readily accessed when needed for use.

(7) Seat belt and shoulder harness.  For each wheelchair or mobility aid securement device provided, a passenger seat belt and shoulder harness, complying with all applicable provisions of part 571 of this title, shall also be provided for use by wheelchair or mobility aid users. Such seat belts and shoulder harnesses shall not be used in lieu of a device which secures the wheelchair or mobility aid itself.

§ 38.25 Doors, steps and thresholds.

(a) Slip resistance.  All aisles, steps, floor areas where people walk and floors in securement locations shall have slip-resistant surfaces.

(b) Contrast.  All step edges, thresholds and the boarding edge of ramps or lift platforms shall have a band of color(s) running the full width of the step or edge which contrasts from the step tread and riser, or lift or ramp surface, either light-on-dark or dark-on-light.

(c) Door height.  For vehicles in excess of 22 feet in length, the overhead clearance between the top of the door opening and the raised lift platform, or highest point of a ramp, shall be a minimum of 68 inches. For vehicles of 22 feet in length or less, the overhead clearance between the top of the door opening and the raised lift platform, or highest point of a ramp, shall be a minimum of 56 inches.

§ 38.27 Priority seating signs.

(a) Each vehicle shall contain sign(s) which indicate that seats in the front of the vehicle are priority seats for persons with disabilities, and that other passengers should make such seats available to those who wish to use them. At least one set of forward-facing seats shall be so designated.

(b) Each securement location shall have a sign designating it as such.

(c) Characters on signs required by paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section shall have a width-to-height ratio between 3:5 and 1:1 and a stroke width-to-height ratio between 1:5 and 1:10, with a minimum character height (using an upper case “X”) of 5⁄8 inch, with “wide” spacing (generally, the space between letters shall be 1⁄16 the height of upper case letters), and shall contrast with the background either light-on-dark or dark-on-light.

§ 38.29 Interior circulation, handrails and stanchions.

(a) Interior handrails and stanchions shall permit sufficient turning and maneuvering space for wheelchairs and other mobility aids to reach a securement location from the lift or ramp.

(b) Handrails and stanchions shall be provided in the entrance to the vehicle in a configuration which allows persons with disabilities to grasp such assists from outside the vehicle while starting to board, and to continue using such assists throughout the boarding and fare collection process. Handrails shall have a cross-sectional diameter between 11⁄4 inches and 11⁄2 inches or shall provide an equivalent grasping surface, and have eased edges with corner radii of not less than 1⁄8 inch. Handrails shall be placed to provide a minimum 11⁄2 inches knuckle clearance from the nearest adjacent surface. Where on-board fare collection devices are used on vehicles in excess of 22 feet in length, a horizontal passenger assist shall be located across the front of the vehicle and shall prevent passengers from sustaining injuries on the fare collection device or windshield in the event of a sudden deceleration. Without restricting the vestibule space, the assist shall provide support for a boarding passenger from the front door through the boarding procedure. Passengers shall be able to lean against the assist for security while paying fares.

(c) For vehicles in excess of 22 feet in length, overhead handrail(s) shall be provided which shall be continuous except for a gap at the rear doorway.

(d) Handrails and stanchions shall be sufficient to permit safe boarding, on-board circulation, seating and standing assistance, and alighting by persons with disabilities.

(e) For vehicles in excess of 22 feet in length with front-door lifts or ramps, vertical stanchions immediately behind the driver shall either terminate at the lower edge of the aisle-facing seats, if applicable, or be “dog-legged” so that the floor attachment does not impede or interfere with wheelchair footrests. If the driver seat platform must be passed by a wheelchair or mobility aid user entering the vehicle, the platform, to the maximum extent practicable, shall not extend into the aisle or vestibule beyond the wheel housing.

(f) For vehicles in excess of 22 feet in length, the minimum interior height along the path from the lift to the securement location shall be 68 inches. For vehicles of 22 feet in length or less, the minimum interior height from lift to securement location shall be 56 inches.

§ 38.31 Lighting.

(a) Any stepwell or doorway immediately adjacent to the driver shall have, when the door is open, at least 2 foot-candles of illumination measured on the step tread or lift platform.

(b) Other stepwells and doorways, including doorways in which lifts or ramps are installed, shall have, at all times, at least 2 foot-candles of illumination measured on the step tread, or lift or ramp, when deployed at the vehicle floor level.

(c) The vehicle doorways, including doorways in which lifts or ramps are installed, shall have outside light(s) which, when the door is open, provide at least 1 foot-candle of illumination on the street surface for a distance 3 feet (915 mm) perpendicular to the bottom step tread or lift outer edge. Such light(s) shall be shielded to protect the eyes of entering and exiting passengers.

[56 FR 45756, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 63 FR 51697, 51702, Sept. 28, 1998]

§ 38.33 Fare box.

Where provided, the farebox shall be located as far forward as practicable and shall not obstruct traffic in the vestibule, especially wheelchairs or mobility aids.

§ 38.35 Public information system.

(a) Vehicles in excess of 22 feet in length, used in multiple-stop, fixed-route service, shall be equipped with a public address system permitting the driver, or recorded or digitized human speech messages, to announce stops and provide other passenger information within the vehicle.

(b) [Reserved]

§ 38.37 Stop request.

(a) Where passengers may board or alight at multiple stops at their option, vehicles in excess of 22 feet in length shall provide controls adjacent to the securement location for requesting stops and which alerts the driver that a mobility aid user wishes to disembark. Such a system shall provide auditory and visual indications that the request has been made.

(b) Controls required by paragraph (a) of this section shall be mounted no higher than 48 inches and no lower than 15 inches above the floor, shall be operable with one hand and shall not require tight grasping, pinching, or twisting of the wrist. The force required to activate controls shall be no greater than 5 lbf (22.2 N).

§ 38.39 Destination and route signs.

(a) Where destination or route information is displayed on the exterior of a vehicle, each vehicle shall have illuminated signs on the front and boarding side of the vehicle.

(b) Characters on signs required by paragraph (a) of this section shall have a width-to-height ratio between 3:5 and 1:1 and a stroke width-to-height ratio between 1:5 and 1:10, with a minimum character height (using an upper case “X”) of 1 inch for signs on the boarding side and a minimum character height of 2 inches for front “headsigns”, with “wide” spacing (generally, the space between letters shall be 1⁄16 the height of upper case letters), and shall contrast with the background, either dark-on-light or light-on-dark.

Subpart C—Rapid Rail Vehicles and Systems

§ 38.51 General.

(a) New, used and remanufactured rapid rail vehicles, to be considered accessible by regulations in part 37 of this title, shall comply with this subpart.

(b) If portions of the vehicle are modified in a way that affects or could affect accessibility, each such portion shall comply, to the extent practicable, with the applicable provisions of this subpart. This provision does not require that inaccessible vehicles be retrofitted with lifts, ramps or other boarding devices.

(c) Existing vehicles which are retrofitted to comply with the “one-car-per-train rule” of § 37.93 of this title shall comply with §§ 38.55, 38.57(b), 38.59 of this part and shall have, in new and key stations, at least one door complying with §§ 38.53 (a)(1), (b) and (d) of this part. Removal of seats is not required. Vehicles previously designed and manufactured in accordance with the accessibility requirements of part 609 of this title or the Secretary of Transportation regulations implementing section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 that were in effect before October 7, 1991, and which can be entered and used from stations in which they are to be operated, may be used to satisfy the requirements of § 37.93 of this title.

§ 38.53 Doorways.

(a) Clear width. (1) Passenger doorways on vehicle sides shall have clear openings at least 32 inches wide when open.

(2) If doorways connecting adjoining cars in a multi-car train are provided, and if such doorway is connected by an aisle with a minimum clear width of 30 inches to one or more spaces where wheelchair or mobility aid users can be accommodated, then such doorway shall have a minimum clear opening of 30 inches to permit wheelchair and mobility aid users to be evacuated to an adjoining vehicle in an emergency.

(b) Signage.  The International Symbol of Accessibility shall be displayed on the exterior of accessible vehicles operating on an accessible rapid rail system unless all vehicles are accessible and are not marked by the access symbol. (See Fig. 6.)

(c) Signals.  Auditory and visual warning signals shall be provided to alert passengers of closing doors.

(d) Coordination with boarding platform —(1) Requirements.  Where new vehicles will operate in new stations, the design of vehicles shall be coordinated with the boarding platform design such that the horizontal gap between each vehicle door at rest and the platform shall be no greater than 3 inches and the height of the vehicle floor shall be within plus or minus 5⁄8 inch of the platform height under all normal passenger load conditions. Vertical alignment may be accomplished by vehicle air suspension or other suitable means of meeting the requirement.

(2) Exception.  New vehicles operating in existing stations may have a floor height within plus or minus 11⁄2 inches of the platform height. At key stations, the horizontal gap between at least one door of each such vehicle and the platform shall be no greater than 3 inches.

(3) Exception.  Retrofitted vehicles shall be coordinated with the platform in new and key stations such that the horizontal gap shall be no greater than 4 inches and the height of the vehicle floor, under 50% passenger load, shall be within plus or minus 2 inches of the platform height.

§ 38.55 Priority seating signs.

(a) Each vehicle shall contain sign(s) which indicate that certain seats are priority seats for persons with disabilities, and that other passengers should make such seats available to those who wish to use them.

(b) Characters on signs required by paragraph (a) of this section shall have a width-to-height ratio between 3:5 and 1:1 and a stroke width-to-height ratio between 1:5 and 1:10, with a minimum character height (using an upper case “X”) of 5⁄8 inch, with “wide” spacing (generally, the space between letters shall be 1⁄16 the height of upper case letters), and shall contrast with the background, either light-on-dark or dark-on-light.

§ 38.57 Interior circulation, handrails and stanchions.

(a) Handrails and stanchions shall be provided to assist safe boarding, on-board circulation, seating and standing assistance, and alighting by persons with disabilities.

(b) Handrails, stanchions, and seats shall allow a route at least 32 inches wide so that at least two wheelchair or mobility aid users can enter the vehicle and position the wheelchairs or mobility aids in areas, each having a minimum clear space of 48 inches by 30 inches, which do not unduly restrict movement of other passengers. Space to accommodate wheelchairs and mobility aids may be provided within the normal area used by standees and designation of specific spaces is not required. Particular attention shall be given to ensuring maximum maneuverability immediately inside doors. Ample vertical stanchions from ceiling to seat-back rails shall be provided. Vertical stanchions from ceiling to floor shall not interfere with wheelchair or mobility aid user circulation and shall be kept to a minimum in the vicinity of doors.

(c) The diameter or width of the gripping surface of handrails and stanchions shall be 11⁄4 inches to 11⁄2 inches or provide an equivalent gripping surface and shall provide a minimum 11⁄2 inches knuckle clearance from the nearest adjacent surface.

§ 38.59 Floor surfaces.

Floor surfaces on aisles, places for standees, and areas where wheelchair and mobility aid users are to be accommodated shall be slip-resistant.

§ 38.61 Public information system.

(a) (1) Requirements.  Each vehicle shall be equipped with a public address system permitting transportation system personnel, or recorded or digitized human speech messages, to announce stations and provide other passenger information. Alternative systems or devices which provide equivalent access are also permitted. Each vehicle operating in stations having more than one line or route shall have an external public address system to permit transportation system personnel, or recorded or digitized human speech messages, to announce train, route, or line identification information.

(2) Exception.  Where station announcement systems provide information on arriving trains, an external train speaker is not required.

(b) [Reserved]

§ 38.63 Between-car barriers.

(a) Requirement.  Suitable devices or systems shall be provided to prevent, deter or warn individuals from inadvertently stepping off the platform between cars. Acceptable solutions include, but are not limited to, pantograph gates, chains, motion detectors or similar devices.

(b) Exception.  Between-car barriers are not required where platform screens are provided which close off the platform edge and open only when trains are correctly aligned with the doors.

Subpart D—Light Rail Vehicles and Systems

§ 38.71 General.

(a) New, used and remanufactured light rail vehicles, to be considered accessible by regulations in part 37 of this title shall comply with this subpart.

(b) (1) Vehicles intended to be operated solely in light rail systems confined entirely to a dedicated right-of-way, and for which all stations or stops are designed and constructed for revenue service after the effective date of standards for design and construction in §§ 37.21 and 37.23 of this title shall provide level boarding and shall comply with §§ 38.73(d)(1) and 38.85 of this part.

(2) Vehicles designed for, and operated on, pedestrian malls, city streets, or other areas where level boarding is not practicable shall provide wayside or car-borne lifts, mini-high platforms, or other means of access in compliance with § 38.83 (b) or (c) of this part.

(c) If portions of the vehicle are modified in a way that affects or could affect accessibility, each such portion shall comply, to the extent practicable, with the applicable provisions of this subpart. This provision does not require that inaccessible vehicles be retrofitted with lifts, ramps or other boarding devices.

(d) Existing vehicles retrofitted to comply with the “one-car-per-train rule” at § 37.93 of this title shall comply with § 38.75, § 38.77(c), § 38.79(a) and § 38.83(a) of this part and shall have, in new and key stations, at least one door which complies with §§ 38.73 (a)(1), (b) and (d) of this part. Vehicles previously designed and manufactured in accordance with the accessibility requirements of part 609 of this title or the Secretary of Transportation regulations implementing section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 that were in effect before October 7, 1991, and which can be entered and used from stations in which they are to be operated, may be used to satisfy the requirements of § 37.93 of this title.

§ 38.73 Doorways.

(a) Clear width. (1) All passenger doorways on vehicle sides shall have minimum clear openings of 32 inches when open.

(2) If doorways connecting adjoining cars in a multi-car train are provided, and if such doorway is connected by an aisle with a minimum clear width of 30 inches to one or more spaces where wheelchair or mobility aid users can be accommodated, then such doorway shall have a minimum clear opening of 30 inches to permit wheelchair and mobility aid users to be evacuated to an adjoining vehicle in an emergency.

(b) Signage.  The International Symbol of Accessibility shall be displayed on the exterior of each vehicle operating on an accessible light rail system unless all vehicles are accessible and are not marked by the access symbol (see fig. 6).

(c) Signals.  Auditory and visual warning signals shall be provided to alert passengers of closing doors.

(d) Coordination with boarding platform —(1) Requirements.  The design of level-entry vehicles shall be coordinated with the boarding platform or mini-high platform design so that the horizontal gap between a vehicle at rest and the platform shall be no greater than 3 inches and the height of the vehicle floor shall be within plus or minus 5⁄8 inch of the platform height. Vertical alignment may be accomplished by vehicle air suspension, automatic ramps or lifts, or any combination.

(2) Exception.  New vehicles operating in existing stations may have a floor height within plus or minus 11⁄2 inches of the platform height. At key stations, the horizontal gap between at least one door of each such vehicle and the platform shall be no greater than 3 inches.

(3) Exception.  Retrofitted vehicles shall be coordinated with the platform in new and key stations such that the horizontal gap shall be no greater than 4 inches and the height of the vehicle floor, under 50% passenger load, shall be within plus or minus 2 inches of the platform height.

(4) Exception.  Where it is not operationally or structurally practicable to meet the horizontal or vertical requirements of paragraphs (d) (1), (2) or (3) of this section, platform or vehicle devices complying with § 38.83(b) or platform or vehicle mounted ramps or bridge plates complying with § 38.83(c) shall be provided.

§ 38.75 Priority seating signs.

(a) Each vehicle shall contain sign(s) which indicate that certain seats are priority seats for persons with disabilities, and that other passengers should make such seats available to those who wish to use them.

(b) Where designated wheelchair or mobility aid seating locations are provided, signs shall indicate the location and advise other passengers of the need to permit wheelchair and mobility aid users to occupy them.

(c) Characters on signs required by paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section shall have a width-to-height ratio between 3:5 and 1:1 and a stroke width-to-height ratio between 1:5 and 1:10, with a minimum character height (using an upper case “X”) of 5⁄8 inch, with “wide” spacing (generally, the space between letters shall be 1⁄16 the height of upper case letters), and shall contrast with the background, either light-on-dark or dark-on-light.

§ 38.77 Interior circulation, handrails and stanchions.

(a) Handrails and stanchions shall be sufficient to permit safe boarding, on-board circulation, seating and standing assistance, and alighting by persons with disabilities.

(b) At entrances equipped with steps, handrails and stanchions shall be provided in the entrance to the vehicle in a configuration which allows passengers to grasp such assists from outside the vehicle while starting to board, and to continue using such handrails or stanchions throughout the boarding process. Handrails shall have a cross-sectional diameter between 11⁄4 inches and 11⁄2 inches or shall provide an equivalent grasping surface, and have eased edges with corner radii of not less than 1⁄8 inch. Handrails shall be placed to provide a minimum 11⁄2 inches knuckle clearance from the nearest adjacent surface. Where on-board fare collection devices are used, a horizontal passenger assist shall be located between boarding passengers and the fare collection device and shall prevent passengers from sustaining injuries on the fare collection device or windshield in the event of a sudden deceleration. Without restricting the vestibule space, the assist shall provide support for a boarding passenger from the door through the boarding procedure. Passengers shall be able to lean against the assist for security while paying fares.

(c) At all doors on level-entry vehicles, and at each entrance accessible by lift, ramp, bridge plate or other suitable means, handrails, stanchions, passenger seats, vehicle driver seat platforms, and fare boxes, if applicable, shall be located so as to allow a route at least 32 inches wide so that at least two wheelchair or mobility aid users can enter the vehicle and position the wheelchairs or mobility aids in areas, each having a minimum clear space of 48 inches by 30 inches, which do not unduly restrict movement of other passengers. Space to accommodate wheelchairs and mobility aids may be provided within the normal area used by standees and designation of specific spaces is not required. Particular attention shall be given to ensuring maximum maneuverability immediately inside doors. Ample vertical stanchions from ceiling to seat-back rails shall be provided. Vertical stanchions from ceiling to floor shall not interfere with wheelchair or mobility aid circulation and shall be kept to a minimum in the vicinity of accessible doors.

§ 38.79 Floors, steps and thresholds.

(a) Floor surfaces on aisles, step treads, places for standees, and areas where wheelchair and mobility aid users are to be accommodated shall be slip-resistant.

(b) All thresholds and step edges shall have a band of color(s) running the full width of the step or threshold which contrasts from the step tread and riser or adjacent floor, either light-on-dark or dark-on-light.

§ 38.81 Lighting.

(a) Any stepwell or doorway with a lift, ramp or bridge plate immediately adjacent to the driver shall have, when the door is open, at least 2 foot-candles of illumination measured on the step tread or lift platform.

(b) Other stepwells, and doorways with lifts, ramps or bridge plates, shall have, at all times, at least 2 foot-candles of illumination measured on the step tread or lift or ramp, when deployed at the vehicle floor level.

(c) The doorways of vehicles not operating at lighted station platforms shall have outside lights which provide at least 1 foot-candle of illumination on the station platform or street surface for a distance of 3 feet perpendicular to all points on the bottom step tread. Such lights shall be located below window level and shielded to protect the eyes of entering and exiting passengers.

§ 38.83 Mobility aid accessibility.

(a) (1) General.  All new light rail vehicles, other than level entry vehicles, covered by this subpart shall provide a level-change mechanism or boarding device (e.g., lift, ramp or bridge plate) complying with either paragraph (b) or (c) of this section and sufficient clearances to permit at least two wheelchair or mobility aid users to reach areas, each with a minimum clear floor space of 48 inches by 30 inches, which do not unduly restrict passenger flow. Space to accommodate wheelchairs and mobility aids may be provided within the normal area used by standees and designation of specific spaces is not required.

(2) Exception.  If lifts, ramps or bridge plates meeting the requirements of this section are provided on station platforms or other stops required to be accessible, or mini-high platforms complying with § 38.73(d) of this part are provided, the vehicle is not required to be equipped with a car-borne device. Where each new vehicle is compatible with a single platform-mounted access system or device, additional systems or devices are not required for each vehicle provided that the single device could be used to provide access to each new vehicle if passengers using wheelchairs or mobility aids could not be accommodated on a single vehicle.

(b) Vehicle lift —(1) Design load.  The design load of the lift shall be at least 600 pounds. Working parts, such as cables, pulleys, and shafts, which can be expected to wear, and upon which the lift depends for support of the load, shall have a safety factor of at least six, based on the ultimate strength of the material. Nonworking parts, such as platform, frame, and attachment hardware which would not be expected to wear, shall have a safety factor of at least three, based on the ultimate strength of the material.

(2) Controls —(i) Requirements.  The controls shall be interlocked with the vehicle brakes, propulsion system, or door, or shall provide other appropriate mechanisms or systems, to ensure that the vehicle cannot be moved when the lift is not stowed and so the lift cannot be deployed unless the interlocks or systems are engaged. The lift shall deploy to all levels (i.e., ground, curb, and intermediate positions) normally encountered in the operating environment. Where provided, each control for deploying, lowering, raising, and stowing the lift and lowering the roll-off barrier shall be of a momentary contact type requiring continuous manual pressure by the operator and shall not allow improper lift sequencing when the lift platform is occupied. The controls shall allow reversal of the lift operation sequence, such as raising or lowering a platform that is part way down, without allowing an occupied platform to fold or retract into the stowed position.

(ii) Exception.  Where physical or safety constraints prevent the deployment at some stops of a lift having its long dimension perpendicular to the vehicle axis, the transportation entity may specify a lift which is designed to deploy with its long dimension parallel to the vehicle axis and which pivots into or out of the vehicle while occupied (i.e., “rotary lift”). The requirements of paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section prohibiting the lift from being stowed while occupied shall not apply to a lift design of this type if the stowed position is within the passenger compartment and the lift is intended to be stowed while occupied.

(iii) Exception.  The brake or propulsion system interlocks requirement does not apply to a station platform mounted lift provided that a mechanical, electrical or other system operates to ensure that vehicles do not move when the lift is in use.

(3) Emergency operation.  The lift shall incorporate an emergency method of deploying, lowering to ground level with a lift occupant, and raising and stowing the empty lift if the power to the lift fails. No emergency method, manual or otherwise, shall be capable of being operated in a manner that could be hazardous to the lift occupant or to the operator when operated according to manufacturer's instructions, and shall not permit the platform to be stowed or folded when occupied, unless the lift is a rotary lift intended to be stowed while occupied.

(4) Power or equipment failure.  Lift platforms stowed in a vertical position, and deployed platforms when occupied, shall have provisions to prevent their deploying, falling, or folding any faster than 12 inches/second or their dropping of an occupant in the event of a single failure of any load carrying component.

(5) Platform barriers.  The lift platform shall be equipped with barriers to prevent any of the wheels of a wheelchair or mobility aid from rolling off the lift during its operation. A movable barrier or inherent design feature shall prevent a wheelchair or mobility aid from rolling off the edge closest to the vehicle until the lift is in its fully raised position. Each side of the lift platform which extends beyond the vehicle in its raised position shall have a barrier a minimum 11⁄2 inches high. Such barriers shall not interfere with maneuvering into or out of the aisle. The loading-edge barrier (outer barrier) which functions as a loading ramp when the lift is at ground level, shall be sufficient when raised or closed, or a supplementary system shall be provided, to prevent a power wheelchair or mobility aid from riding over or defeating it. The outer barrier on the outboard of the lift shall automatically rise or close, or a supplementary system shall automatically engage, and remain raised, closed, or engaged at all times that the lift is more than 3 inches above the station platform or roadway and the lift is occupied. Alternatively, a barrier or system may be raised, lowered, opened, closed, engaged or disengaged by the lift operator provided an interlock or inherent design feature prevents the lift from rising unless the barrier is raised or closed or the supplementary system is engaged.

(6) Platform surface.  The lift platform surface shall be free of any protrusions over 1⁄4 inch high and shall be slip resistant. The lift platform shall have a minimum clear width of 281⁄2 inches at the platform, a minimum clear width of 30 inches measured from 2 inches above the lift platform surface to 30 inches above the surface, and a minimum clear length of 48 inches measured from 2 inches above the surface of the platform to 30 inches above the surface. (See Fig. 1)

(7) Platform gaps.  Any openings between the lift platform surface and the raised barriers shall not exceed 5⁄8 inch wide. When the lift is at vehicle floor height with the inner barrier (if applicable) down or retracted, gaps between the forward lift platform edge and vehicle floor shall not exceed 1⁄2 inch horizontally and 5⁄8 inch vertically. Platforms on semi-automatic lifts may have a hand hold not exceeding 11⁄2 inches by 41⁄2 inches located between the edge barriers.

(8) Platform entrance ramp.  The entrance ramp, or loading-edge barrier used as a ramp, shall not exceed a slope of 1:8 measured on level ground, for a maximum rise of 3 inches, and the transition from the station platform or roadway to ramp may be vertical without edge treatment up to 1⁄4 inch. Thresholds between 1⁄4 inch and 1⁄2 inch high shall be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2.

(9) Platform deflection.  The lift platform (not including the entrance ramp) shall not deflect more than 3 degrees (exclusive of vehicle roll) in any direction between its unloaded position and its position when loaded with 600 pounds applied through a 26 inch by 26 inch test pallet at the centroid of the lift platform.

(10) Platform movement.  No part of the platform shall move at a rate exceeding 6 inches/second during lowering and lifting an occupant, and shall not exceed 12 inches/second during deploying or stowing. This requirement does not apply to the deployment or stowage cycles of lifts that are manually deployed or stowed. The maximum platform horizontal and vertical acceleration when occupied shall be 0.3g.

(11) Boarding direction.  The lift shall permit both inboard and outboard facing of wheelchairs and mobility aids.

(12) Use by standees.  Lifts shall accommodate persons using walkers, crutches, canes or braces or who otherwise have difficulty using steps. The lift may be marked to indicate a preferred standing position.

(13) Handrails.  Platforms on lifts shall be equipped with handrails, on two sides, which move in tandem with the lift which shall be graspable and provide support to standees throughout the entire lift operation. Handrails shall have a usable component at least 8 inches long with the lowest portion a minimum 30 inches above the platform and the highest portion a maximum 38 inches above the platform. The handrails shall be capable of withstanding a force of 100 pounds concentrated at any point on the handrail without permanent deformation of the rail or its supporting structure. Handrails shall have a cross-sectional diameter between 11⁄4 inches and 11⁄2 inches or shall provide an equivalent grasping surface, and have eased edges with corner radii of not less than 1⁄8 inch. Handrails shall be placed to provide a minimum 11⁄2 inches knuckle clearance from the nearest adjacent surface. Handrails shall not interfere with wheelchair or mobility aid maneuverability when entering or leaving the vehicle.

(c) Vehicle ramp or bridge plate —(1) Design load.  Ramps or bridge plates 30 inches or longer shall support a load of 600 pounds, placed at the centroid of the ramp or bridge plate distributed over an area of 26 inches, with a safety factor of at least 3 based on the ultimate strength of the material. Ramps or bridge plates shorter than 30 inches shall support a load of 300 pounds.

(2) Ramp surface.  The ramp or bridge plate surface shall be continuous and slip resistant, shall not have protrusions from the surface greater then 1⁄4 inch, shall have a clear width of 30 inches, and shall accommodate both four-wheel and three-wheel mobility aids.

(3) Ramp threshold.  The transition from roadway or station platform and the transition from vehicle floor to the ramp or bridge plate may be vertical without edge treatment up to 1⁄4 inch. Changes in level between 1⁄4 inch and 1⁄2 inch shall be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2.

(4) Ramp barriers.  Each side of the ramp or bridge plate shall have barriers at least 2 inches high to prevent mobility aid wheels from slipping off.

(5) Slope.  Ramps or bridge plates shall have the least slope practicable. If the height of the vehicle floor, under 50% passenger load, from which the ramp is deployed is 3 inches or less above the station platform a maximum slope of 1:4 is permitted; if the height of the vehicle floor, under 50% passenger load, from which the ramp is deployed is 6 inches or less, but more than 3 inches, above the station platform a maximum slope of 1:6 is permitted; if the height of the vehicle floor, under 50% passenger load, from which the ramp is deployed is 9 inches or less, but more than 6 inches, above the station platform a maximum slope of 1:8 is permitted; if the height of the vehicle floor, under 50% passenger load, from which the ramp is deployed is greater than 9 inches above the station platform a slope of 1:12 shall be achieved. Folding or telescoping ramps are permitted provided they meet all structural requirements of this section.

(6) Attachment —(i) Requirement.  When in use for boarding or alighting, the ramp or bridge plate shall be attached to the vehicle, or otherwise prevented from moving such that it is not subject to displacement when loading or unloading a heavy power mobility aid and that any gaps between vehicle and ramp or bridge plate, and station platform and ramp or bridge plate, shall not exceed 5⁄8 inch.

(ii) Exception.  Ramps or bridge plates which are attached to, and deployed from, station platforms are permitted in lieu of vehicle devices provided they meet the displacement requirements of paragraph (c)(6)(i) of this section.

(7) Stowage.  A compartment, securement system, or other appropriate method shall be provided to ensure that stowed ramps or bridge plates, including portable ramps or bridges plates stowed in the passenger area, do not impinge on a passenger's wheelchair or mobility aid or pose any hazard to passengers in the event of a sudden stop.

(8) Handrails.  If provided, handrails shall allow persons with disabilities to grasp them from outside the vehicle while starting to board, and to continue to use them throughout the boarding process, and shall have the top between 30 inches and 38 inches above the ramp surface. The handrails shall be capable of withstanding a force of 100 pounds concentrated at any point on the handrail without permanent deformation of the rail or its supporting structure. The handrail shall have a cross- sectional diameter between 11⁄4 inches and 11⁄2 inches or shall provide an equivalent grasping surface, and have “eased” edges with corner radii of not less than 1⁄8 inch. Handrails shall not interfere with wheelchair or mobility aid maneuverability when entering or leaving the vehicle.

§ 38.85 Between-car barriers.

Where vehicles operate in a high-platform, level-boarding mode, devices or systems shall be provided to prevent, deter or warn individuals from inadvertently stepping off the platform between cars. Appropriate devices include, but are not limited to, pantograph gates, chains, motion detectors or other suitable devices.

§ 38.87 Public information system.

(a) Each vehicle shall be equipped with an interior public address system permitting transportation system personnel, or recorded or digitized human speech messages, to announce stations and provide other passenger information. Alternative systems or devices which provide equivalent access are also permitted.

(b) [Reserved]

Subpart E—Commuter Rail Cars and Systems

§ 38.91 General.

(a) New, used and remanufactured commuter rail cars, to be considered accessible by regulations in part 37 of this title, shall comply with this subpart.

(b) If portions of the car are modified in such a way that it affects or could affect accessibility, each such portion shall comply, to the extent practicable, with the applicable provisions of this subpart. This provision does not require that inaccessible cars be retrofitted with lifts, ramps or other boarding devices.

(c) (1) Commuter rail cars shall comply with §§ 38.93(d) and 38.109 of this part for level boarding unless structurally or operationally impracticable.

(2) Where level boarding is structurally or operationally impracticable, commuter rail cars shall comply § 38.95 of this part.

(d) Existing vehicles retrofitted to comply with the “one-car-per-train rule” at § 37.93 of this title shall comply with §§ 38.93(e), 38.95(a) and 38.107 of this part and shall have, in new and key stations at least one door on each side from which passengers board which complies with § 38.93(d) of this part. Vehicles previously designed and manufactured in accordance with the program accessibility requirements of section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, or implementing regulations of the Secretary of Transportation that were in effect before October 7, 1991; and which can be entered and used from stations in which they are to be operated, may be used to satisfy the requirements of § 37.93 of this title.

[56 FR 45756, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 76 FR 57939, Sept. 19, 2011]

§ 38.93 Doorways.

(a) Clear width. (1) At least one door on each side of the car from which passengers board opening onto station platforms and at least one adjacent doorway into the passenger coach compartment, if provided, shall have a minimum clear opening of 32 inches.

(2) If doorways connecting adjoining cars in a multi-car train are provided, and if such doorway is connected by an aisle with a minimum clear width of 30 inches to one or more spaces where wheelchair or mobility aid users can be accommodated, then such doorway shall have, to the maximum extent practicable in accordance with the regulations issued under the Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970 (49 CFR parts 229 and 231), a clear opening of 30 inches.

(b) Passageways.  A route at least 32 inches wide shall be provided from doors required to be accessible by paragraph (a)(1) of this section to seating locations complying with § 38.95(d) of this part. In cars where such doorways require passage through a vestibule, such vestibule shall have a minimum width of 42 inches. (See Fig. 3.)

(c) Signals.  If doors to the platform close automatically or from a remote location, auditory and visual warning signals shall be provided to alert passengers or closing doors.

(d) Coordination with boarding platform —(1) Requirements.  Cars operating in stations with high platforms, or mini-high platforms, shall be coordinated with the boarding platform design such that the horizontal gap between a car at rest and the platform shall be no greater than 3 inches and the height of the car floor shall be within plus or minus 5⁄8 inch of the platform height. Vertical alignment may be accomplished by car air suspension, platform lifts or other devices, or any combination.

(2) Exception.  New vehicles operating in existing stations may have a floor height within plus or minus 11⁄2 inches of the platform height. At key stations, the horizontal gap between at least one accessible door of each such vehicle and the platform shall be no greater than 3 inches.

(3) Exception.  Where platform set-backs do not allow the horizontal gap or vertical alignment specified in paragraph (d)(1) or (d)(2) of this section, car, platform or portable lifts complying with § 38.95(b) of this part, or car or platform ramps or bridge plates, complying with § 38.95(c) of this part, shall be provided,ensuring compliance with section 37.42, where applicable.

(4) Exception.  Retrofitted vehicles shall be coordinated with the platform in new and key stations such that the horizontal gap shall be no greater than 4 inches and the height of the vehicle floor, under 50% passenger load, shall be within plus or minus 2 inches of the platform height.

(e) Signage.  The International Symbol of Accessibility shall be displaced on the exterior of all doors complying with this section unless all cars are accessible and are not marked by the access symbol (see Fig. 6). Appropriate signage shall also indicate which accessible doors are adjacent to an accessible restroom, if applicable.

[56 FR 45756, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 76 FR 57939, Sept. 19, 2011]

§ 38.95 Mobility aid accessibility.

(a) (1) General.  All new commuter rail cars, other than level entry cars, covered by this subpart shall provide a level-change mechanism or boarding device (e.g., lift, ramp or bridge plate) complying with either paragraph (b) or (c) of this section; sufficient clearances to permit a wheelchair or mobility aid user to reach a seating location; and at least two wheelchair or mobility aid seating locations complying with paragraph (d) of this section.

(2) Exception.  If level-entry boarding, portable or platform lifts, ramps or bridge plates meeting the applicable requirements of this section are provided on station platforms or other stops required to be accessible, or mini-high platforms complying with § 38.93(d) are provided, the car is not required to be equipped with a car-borne device. The access systems or devices used at a station to which section 37.42 applies must permit compliance with that section.

(b) Car Lift —(1) Design load.  The design load of the lift shall be at least 600 pounds. Working parts, such as cables, pulleys, and shafts, which can be expected to wear, and upon which the lift depends for support of the load, shall have a safety factor of at least six, based on the ultimate strength of the material. Nonworking parts, such as platform, frame, and attachment hardware which would not be expected to wear, shall have a safety factor of at least three, based on the ultimate strength of the material.

(2) Controls —(i) Requirements.  The controls shall be interlocked with the car brakes, propulsion system, or door, or shall provide other appropriate mechanisms or systems, to ensure that the car cannot be moved when the lift is not stowed and so the lift cannot be deployed unless the interlocks or systems are engaged. The lift shall deploy to all platform levels normally encountered in the operating environment. Where provided, each control for deploying, lowering, raising, and stowing the lift and lowering the roll-off barrier shall be of a monetary contact type requiring continuous manual pressure by the operator and shall not allow improper lift sequencing when the lift platform is occupied. The controls shall allow reversal of the lift operation sequence, such as raising or lowering a platform that is part way down, without allowing an occupied platform to fold or retract into the stowed position.

(ii) Exception.  Where physical or safety constraints prevent the deployment at some stops of a lift having its long dimension perpendicular to the car axis, the transportation entity may specify a lift which is designed to deploy with its long dimension parallel to the car axis and which pivots into or out of the car while occupied (i.e., “rotary lift”). The requirements of paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section prohibiting the lift from being stowed while occupied shall not apply to a lift design of this type if the stowed position is within the passenger compartment and the lift is intended to be stowed while occupied.

(iii) Exception.  The brake or propulsion system interlock requirement does not apply to a platform mounted or portable lift provided that a mechanical, electrical or other system operates to ensure that cars do not move when the lift is in use.

(3) Emergency operation.  The lift shall incorporate an emergency method of deploying, lowering to ground or platform level with a lift occupant, and raising and stowing the empty lift if the power to the lift fails. No emergency method, manual or otherwise, shall be capable of being operated in a manner that could be hazardous to the lift occupant or to the operator when operated according to manufacturer's instructions, and shall not permit the platform to be stowed or folded when occupied, unless the lift is a rotary lift intended to be stowed while occupied.

(4) Power or equipment failure.  Platforms stowed in a vertical position, and deployed platforms when occupied, shall have provisions to prevent their deploying, falling, or folding any faster than 12 inches/second or their dropping of an occupant in the event of a single failure of any load carrying component.

(5) Platform barriers.  The lift platform shall be equipped with barriers to prevent any of the wheels of a wheelchair or mobility aid from rolling off the lift during its operation. A movable barrier or inherent design feature shall prevent a wheelchair or mobility aid from rolling off the edge closest to the car until the lift is in its fully raised position. Each side of the lift platform which, in its raised position, extends beyond the car shall have a barrier a minimum 11⁄2 inches high. Such barriers shall not interfere with maneuvering into or out of the car. The loading-edge barrier (outer barrier) which functions as a loading ramp when the lift is at ground or station platform level, shall be sufficient when raised or closed, or a supplementary system shall be provided, to prevent a power wheelchair or mobility aid from riding over or defeating it. The outer barrier of the lift shall automatically rise or close, or a supplementary system shall automatically engage, and remain raised, closed, or engaged at all times that the lift platform is more than 3 inches above the station platform and the lift is occupied. Alternatively, a barrier or system may be raised, lowered, opened, closed, engaged or disengaged by the lift operator provided an interlock or inherent design feature prevents the lift from rising unless the barrier is raised or closed or the supplementary system is engaged.

(6) Platform surface.  The lift platform surface shall be free of any protrusions over 1⁄4 inch high and shall be slip resistant. The lift platform shall have a minimum clear width of 281⁄2 inches at the platform, a minimum clear width of 30 inches measured from 2 inches above the lift platform surface to 30 inches above the surface, and a minimum clear length of 48 inches measured from 2 inches above the surface of the platform to 30 inches above the surface. (See Fig. 1)

(7) Platform gaps.  Any openings between the lift platform surface and the raised barriers shall not exceed 5⁄8 inch wide. When the lift is at car floor height with the inner barrier down (if applicable) or retracted, gaps between the forward lift platform edge and car floor shall not exceed 1⁄2 inch horizontally and 5⁄8 inch vertically.

(8) Platform entrance ramp.  The entrance ramp, or loading-edge barrier used as a ramp, shall not exceed a slope of 1:8, when measured on level ground, for a maximum rise of 3 inches, and the transition from station platform to ramp may be vertical without edge treatment up to 1⁄4 inch. Thresholds between 1⁄4 inch and 1⁄2 inch high shall be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2.

(9) Platform deflection.  The lift platform (not including the entrance ramp) shall not deflect more than 3 degrees (exclusive of vehicle roll) in any direction between its unloaded position and its position when loaded with 600 pounds applied through a 26 inch by 26 inch test pallet at the centroid of the lift platform.

(10) Platform movement.  No part of the platform shall move at a rate exceeding 6 inches/second during lowering and lifting an occupant, and shall not exceed 12 inches/second during deploying or stowing. This requirement does not apply to the deployment or stowage cycles of lifts that are manually deployed or stowed. The maximum platform horizontal and vertical acceleration when occupied shall be 0.3g.

(11) Boarding direction.  The lift shall permit both inboard and outboard facing of wheelchairs and mobility aids.

(12) Use by standees.  Lifts shall accommodate persons using walkers, crutches, canes or braces or who otherwise have difficulty using steps. The lift may be marked to indicate a preferred standing position.

(13) Handrails.  Platforms on lifts shall be equipped with handrails, on two sides, which move in tandem with the lift which shall be graspable and provide support to standees throughout the entire lift operation. Handrails shall have a usable component at least 8 inches long with the lowest portion a minimum 30 inches above the platform and the highest portion a maximum 38 inches above the platform. The handrails shall be capable of withstanding a force of 100 pounds concentrated at any point on the handrail without permanent deformation of the rail or its supporting structure. The handrail shall have a cross-sectional diameter between 11⁄4 inches and 11⁄2 inches or shall provide an equivalent grasping surface, and have eased edges with corner radii of not less than 1⁄8 inch. Handrails shall be placed to provide a minimum 11⁄2 inches knuckle clearance from the nearest adjacent surface. Handrails shall not interfere with wheelchair or mobility aid maneuverability when entering or leaving the car.

(c) Car ramp or bridge plate —(1) Design load.  Ramps or bridge plates 30 inches or longer shall support a load of 600 pounds, placed at the centroid of the ramp or bridge plate distributed over an area of 26 inches by 26 inches, with a safety factor of at least 3 based on the ultimate strength of the material. Ramps or bridge plates shorter than 30 inches shall support a load of 300 pounds.

(2) Ramp surface.  The ramp or bridge plate surface shall be continuous and slip resistant, shall not have protrusions from the surface greater than 1⁄4 inch high, shall have a clear width of 30 inches and shall accommodate both four-wheel and three-wheel mobility aids.

(3) Ramp threshold.  The transition from station platform to the ramp or bridge plate and the transition from car floor to the ramp or bridge plate may be vertical without edge treatment up to 1⁄4 inch. Changes in level between 1⁄4 inch and 1⁄2 inch shall be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2.

(4) Ramp barriers.  Each side of the ramp or bridge plate shall have barriers at least 2 inches high to prevent mobility aid wheels from slipping off.

(5) Slope.  Ramps or bridge plates shall have the least slope practicable. If the height of the vehicle floor, under 50% passenger load, from which the ramp is deployed is 3 inches or less above the station platform a maximum slope of 1:4 is permitted; if the height of the vehicle floor, under 50% passenger load, from which the ramp is deployed is 6 inches or less, but more than 3 inches, above the station platform a maximum slope of 1:6 is permitted; if the height of the vehicle floor, under 50% passenger load, from which the ramp is deployed is 9 inches or less, but more than 6 inches, above the station platform a maximum slope of 1:8 is permitted; if the height of the vehicle floor, under 50% passenger load, from which the ramp is deployed is greater than 9 inches above the station platform a slope of 1:12 shall be achieved. Folding or telescoping ramps are permitted provided they meet all structural requirements of this section.

(6) Attachment —(i) Requirement.  When in use for boarding or alighting, the ramp or bridge plate shall be attached to the vehicle, or otherwise prevented from moving such that it is not subject to displacement when loading or unloading a heavy power mobility aid and that any gaps between vehicle and ramp or bridge plate, and station platform and ramp or bridge plate, shall not exceed 5⁄8 inch.

(ii) Exception.  Ramps or bridge plates which are attached to, and deployed from, station platforms are permitted in lieu of car devices provided they meet the displacement requirements of paragraph (c)(6)(i) of this section.

(7) Stowage.  A compartment, securement system, or other appropriate method shall be provided to ensure that stowed ramps or bridge plates, including portable ramps or bridge plates stowed in the passenger area, do not impinge on a passenger's wheelchair or mobility aid or pose any hazard to passengers in the event of a sudden stop.

(8) Handrails.  If provided, handrails shall allow persons with disabilities to grasp them from outside the car while starting to board, and to continue to use them throughout the boarding process, and shall have the top between 30 inches and 38 inches above the ramp surface. The handrails shall be capable of withstanding a force of 100 pounds concentrated at any point on the handrail without permanent deformation of the rail or its supporting structure. The handrail shall have a cross-sectional diameter between 11⁄4 inches and 11⁄2 inches or shall provide an equivalent grasping surface, and have eased edges with corner radii of not less than 1⁄8 inch. Handrails shall not interfere with wheelchair or mobility aid maneuverability when entering or leaving the car.

(d) Mobility aid seating location.  Spaces for persons who wish to remain in their wheelchairs or mobility aids shall have a minimum clear floor space 48 inches by 30 inches. Such spaces shall adjoin, and may overlap, an accessible path. Not more than 6 inches of the required clear floor space may be accommodated for footrests under another seat provided there is a minimum of 9 inches from the floor to the lowest part of the seat overhanging the space. Seating spaces may have fold-down or removable seats to accommodate other passengers when a wheelchair or mobility aid user is not occupying the area, provided the seats, when folded up, do not obstruct the clear floor space required. (See Fig. 2.)

[56 FR 45756, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 76 FR 57939, Sept. 19, 2011]

§ 38.97 Interior circulation, handrails and stanchions.

(a) Where provided, handrails or stanchions within the passenger compartment shall be placed to permit sufficient turning and maneuvering space for wheelchairs and other mobility aids to reach a seating location, complying with § 38.95(d) of this part, from an accessible entrance. The diameter or width of the gripping surface of interior handrails and stanchions shall be 11⁄4 inches to 11⁄2 inches or shall provide an equivalent gripping surface. Handrails shall be placed to provide a minimum 11⁄2 inches knuckle clearance from the nearest adjacent surface.

(b) Where provided, handrails or stanchions shall be sufficient to permit safe boarding, on-board circulation, seating and standing assistance, and alighting by persons with disabilities.

(c) At entrances equipped with steps, handrails or stanchions shall be provided in the entrance to the car in a configuration which allows passengers to grasp such assists from outside the car while starting to board, and to continue using such assists throughout the boarding process, to the extent permitted by part 231 of this title.

§ 38.99 Floors, steps and thresholds.

(a) Floor surfaces on aisles, step treads, places for standees, and areas where wheelchair and mobility aid users are to be accommodated shall be slip-resistant.

(b) All thresholds and step edges shall have a band of color(s) running the full width of the step or threshold which contrasts from the step tread and riser or adjacent floor, either light-on-dark or dark-on-light.

§ 38.101 Lighting.

(a) Any stepwell or doorway with a lift, ramp or bridge plate shall have, when the door is open, at least 2 footcandles of illumination measured on the step tread, ramp, bridge plate, or lift platform.

(b) The doorways of cars not operating at lighted station platforms shall have outside lights which, when the door is open, provide at least 1 footcandle of illumination on the station platform surface for a distance of 3 feet perpendicular to all points on the bottom step tread edge. Such lights shall be shielded to protect the eyes of entering and exiting passengers.

§ 38.103 Public information system.

(a) Each car shall be equipped with an interior public address system permitting transportation system personnel, or recorded or digitized human speech messages, to announce stations and provide other passenger information. Alternative systems or devices which provide equivalent access are also permitted.

(b) [Reserved]

§ 38.105 Priority seating signs.

(a) Each car shall contain sign(s) which indicate that certain seats are priority seats for persons with disabilities and that other passengers should make such seats available to those who wish to use them.

(b) Characters on signs required by paragraph (a) shall have a width-to-height ratio between 3:5 and 1:1 and a stroke width-to-height ratio between 1:5 and 1:10, with a minimum character height (using an upper case “X”) of 5⁄8 inch, with “wide” spacing (generally, the space between letters shall be 1⁄16 the height of upper case letters), and shall contrast with the background either light-on-dark or dark-on-light.

§ 38.107 Restrooms.

(a) If a restroom is provided for the general public, it shall be designed so as to allow a person using a wheelchair or mobility aid to enter and use such restroom as specified in paragraphs (a) (1) through (5) of this section.

(1) The minimum clear floor area shall be 35 inches by 60 inches. Permanently installed fixtures may overlap this area a maximum of 6 inches, if the lowest portion of the fixture is a minimum of 9 inches above the floor, and may overlap a maximum of 19 inches, if the lowest portion of the fixture is a minimum of 29 inches above the floor, provided such fixtures do not interfere with access to the water closet. Fold-down or retractable seats or shelves may overlap the clear floor space at a lower height provided they can be easily folded up or moved out of the way.

(2) The height of the water closet shall be 17 inches to 19 inches measured to the top of the toilet seat. Seats shall not be sprung to return to a lifted position.

(3) A grab bar at least 24 inches long shall be mounted behind the water closet, and a horizontal grab bar at least 40 inches long shall be mounted on at least one side wall, with one end not more than 12 inches from the back wall, at a height between 33 inches and 36 inches above the floor.

(4) Faucets and flush controls shall be operable with one hand and shall not require tight grasping, pinching, or twisting of the wrist. The force required to activate controls shall be no greater than 5 lbf (22.2 N). Controls for flush valves shall be mounted no more than 44 inches above the floor.

(5) Doorways on the end of the enclosure, opposite the water closet, shall have a minimum clear opening width of 32 inches. Doorways on the side wall shall have a minimum clear opening width of 39 inches. Door latches and hardware shall be operable with one hand and shall not require tight grasping, pinching, or twisting of the wrist.

(b) Restrooms required to be accessible shall be in close proximity to at least one seating location for persons using mobility aids and shall be connected to such a space by an unobstructed path having a minimum width of 32 inches.

§ 38.109 Between-car barriers.

Where vehicles operate in a high-platform, level-boarding mode, and where between-car bellows are not provided, devices or systems shall be provided to prevent, deter or warn individuals from inadvertently stepping off the platform between cars. Appropriate devices include, but are not limited to, pantograph gates, chains, motion detectors or other suitable devices.

Subpart F—Intercity Rail Cars and Systems

§ 38.111 General.

(a) New, used and remanufactured intercity rail cars, to be considered accessible by regulations in part 37 of this title shall comply with this subpart to the extent required for each type of car as specified below.

(1) Single-level rail passenger coaches and food service cars (other than single-level dining cars) shall comply with §§ 38.113 through 38.123 of this part. Compliance with § 38.125 of this part shall be required only to the extent necessary to meet the requirements of paragraph (d) of this section.

(2) Single-level dining and lounge cars shall have at least one connecting doorway complying with § 38.113(a)(2) of this part connected to a car accessible to persons using wheelchairs or mobility aids, and at least one space complying with §§ 38.125(d) (2) and (3) of this part, to provide table service to a person who wishes to remain in his or her wheelchair, and space to fold and store a wheelchair for a person who wishes to transfer to an existing seat.

(3) Bi-level dining cars shall comply with §§ 38.113(a)(2), 38.115(b), 38.117(a), and 38.121 of this part.

(4) Bi-level lounge cars shall have doors on the lower level, on each side of the car from which passengers board, complying with § 38.113, a restroom complying with § 38.123, and at least one space complying with § 38.125(d) (2) and (3) to provide table service to a person who wishes to remain in his or her wheelchair and space to fold and store a wheelchair for a person who wishes to transfer to an existing seat.

(5) Restrooms, complying with § 38.123 shall be provided in single-level rail passenger coaches and food services cars adjacent to the accessible seating locations required by paragraph (d) of this section. Accessible restrooms are required in dining and lounge cars only if restrooms are provided for other passengers.

(6) Sleeper cars shall comply with §§ 38.113 (b) through (d), 38.115 through 38.121, and 38.125, of this part, and have at least one compartment which can be entered and used by a person using a wheelchair or mobility aid and complying with § 38.127 of this part.

(b) (1) Unless structurally or operationally impracticable, intercity rail cars shall comply with § 38.113(d) of this part for level boarding.

(2) Where level boarding is structurally or operationally impracticable, intercity rail cars shall comply with § 38.125.

(c) If portions of the car are modified in a way that it affects or could affect accessibility, each such portion shall comply, to the extent practicable, with the applicable provisions of this subpart. This provision does not require that inaccessible cars be retrofitted with lifts, ramps or other boarding devices.

(d) Passenger coaches or food service cars shall have the number of spaces complying with § 38.125(d)(2) of this part and the number of spaces complying with § 38.125(d)(3) of this part, as required by § 37.91 of this title.

(e) Existing cars retrofitted to meet the seating requirements of § 37.91 of this title shall comply with § 38.113(e), § 38.123, § 38.125(d) of this part and shall have at least one door on each side from which passengers board complying with § 38.113(d) of this part. Existing cars designed and manufactured to be accessible in accordance with the Secretary of Transportation regulations implementing section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 that were in effect before October 7, 1991, shall comply with § 38.125(a) of this part.

[56 FR 45756, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 76 FR 57939, Sept. 19, 2011]

§ 38.113 Doorways.

(a) Clear width. (1) At least one doorway, on each side of the car from which passengers board, of each car required to be accessible by § 38.111(a) and where the spaces required by § 38.111(d) of this part are located, and at least one adjacent doorway into coach passenger compartments shall have a minimum clear opening width of 32 inches.

(2) Doorways at ends of cars connecting two adjacent cars, to the maximum extent practicable in accordance with regulations issued under the Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970 (49 CFR parts 229 and 231), shall have a clear opening width of 32 inches to permit wheelchair and mobility aid users to enter into a single-level dining car, if available.

(b) Passageway.  Doorways required to be accessible by paragraph (a) of this section shall permit access by persons using mobility aids and shall have an unobstructed passageway at least 32 inches wide leading to an accessible sleeping compartment complying with § 38.127 of this part or seating locations complying with § 38.125(d) of this part. In cars where such doorways require passage through a vestibule, such vestibule shall have a minimum width of 42 inches. (see Fig. 4)

(c) Signals.  If doors to the platform close automatically or from a remote location, auditory and visual warning signals shall be provided to alert passengers of closing doors.

(d) Coordination with boarding platforms —(1) Requirements.  Cars which provide level-boarding in stations with high platforms shall be coordinated with the boarding platform or mini-high platform design such that the horizontal gap between a car at rest and the platform shall be no greater than 3 inches and the height of the car floor shall be within plus or minus 5⁄8 inch of the platform height. Vertical alignment may be accomplished by car air suspension, platform lifts or other devices, or any combination.

(2) Exception.  New cars operating in existing stations may have a floor height within plus or minus 11⁄2 inches of the platform height.

(3) Exception.  Where platform set-backs do not allow the horizontal gap or vertical alignment specified in paragraph (d) (1) or (2), platform or portable lifts complying with § 38.125(b) of this part, or car or platform bridge plates, complying with § 38.125(c) of this part, may be provided ensuring compliance with section 37.42, where applicable.

(4) Exception.  Retrofitted vehicles shall be coordinated with the platform in existing stations such that the horizontal gap shall be no greater than 4 inches and the height of the vehicle floor, under 50% passenger load, shall be within plus or minus 2 inches of the platform height.

(e) Signage.  The International Symbol of Accessibility shall be displayed on the exterior of all doors complying with this section unless all cars and doors are accessible and are not marked by the access symbol (see fig. 6). Appropriate signage shall also indicate which accessible doors are adjacent to an accessible restroom, if applicable.

[56 FR 45756, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 58 FR 63103, Nov. 30, 1993; 76 FR 57939, Sept. 19, 2011]

§ 38.115 Interior circulation, handrails and stanchions.

(a) Where provided, handrails or stanchions within the passenger compartment shall be placed to permit sufficient turning and maneuvering space for wheelchairs and other mobility aids to reach a seating location, complying with § 38.125(d) of this part, from an accessible entrance. The diameter or width of the gripping surface of interior handrails and stanchions shall be 11⁄4 inches to 11⁄2 inches or shall provide an equivalent gripping surface. Handrails shall be placed to provide a minimum 11⁄2 inches knuckle clearance from the nearest adjacent surface.

(b) Where provided, handrails and stanchions shall be sufficient to permit safe boarding, on-board circulation, seating and standing assistance, and alighting by persons with disabilities.

(c) At entrances equipped with steps, handrails or stanchions shall be provided in the entrance to the car in a configuration which allows passengers to grasp such assists from outside the car while starting to board, and to continue using such assists throughout the boarding process, to the extent permitted by part 231 of this title.

§ 38.117 Floors, steps and thresholds.

(a) Floor surfaces on aisles, step treads and areas where wheelchair and mobility aid users are to be accommodated shall be slip-resistant.

(b) All step edges and thresholds shall have a band of color(s) running the full width of the step or threshold which contrasts from the step tread and riser or adjacent floor, either light-on-dark or dark-on-light.

§ 38.119 Lighting.

(a) Any stepwell, or doorway with a lift, ramp or bridge plate, shall have, when the door is open, at least 2 foot-candles of illumination measured on the step tread, ramp, bridge plate or lift platform.

(b) The doorways of cars not operating at lighted station platforms shall have outside lights which, when the door is open, provide at least 1 foot-candle of illumination on the station platform surface for a distance of 3 feet perpendicular to all points on the bottom step tread edge. Such lights shall be shielded to protect the eyes of entering and exiting passengers.

§ 38.121 Public information system.

(a) Each car shall be equipped with a public address system permitting transportation system personnel, or recorded or digitized human speech messages, to announce stations and provide other passenger information. Alternative systems or devices which provide equivalent access are also permitted.

(b) [Reserved]

§ 38.123 Restrooms.

(a) If a restroom is provided for the general public, and an accessible restroom is required by § 38.111 (a) and (e) of this part, it shall be designed so as to allow a person using a wheelchair or mobility aid to enter and use such restroom as specified in paragraphs (a) (1) through (5) of this section.

(1) The minimum clear floor area shall be 35 inches by 60 inches. Permanently installed fixtures may overlap this area a maximum of 6 inches, if the lowest portion of the fixture is a minimum of 9 inches above the floor, and may overlap a maximum of 19 inches, if the lowest portion of the fixture is a minimum of 29 inches above the floor. Fixtures shall not interfere with access to and use of the water closet. Fold-down or retractable seats or shelves may overlap the clear floor space at a lower height provided they can be easily folded up or moved out of the way.

(2) The height of the water closet shall be 17 inches to 19 inches measured to the top of the toilet seat. Seats shall not be sprung to return to a lifted position.

(3) A grab bar at least 24 inches long shall be mounted behind the water closet, and a horizontal grab bar at least 40 inches long shall be mounted on at least one side wall, with one end not more than 12 inches from the back wall, at a height between 33 inches and 36 inches above the floor.

(4) Faucets and flush controls shall be operable with one hand and shall not require tight grasping, pinching, or twisting of the wrist. The force required to activate controls shall be no greater than 5 lbf (22.2 N). Controls for flush valves shall be mounted no more than 44 inches above the floor.

(5) Doorways on the end of the enclosure, opposite the water closet, shall have a minimum clear opening width of 32 inches. Doorways on the side wall shall have a minimum clear opening width of 39 inches. Door latches and hardware shall be operable with one hand and shall not require tight grasping, pinching, or twisting of the wrist.

(b) Restrooms required to be accessible shall be in close proximity to at least one seating location for persons using mobility aids complying with § 38.125(d) of this part and shall be connected to such a space by an unobstructed path having a minimum width of 32 inches.

§ 38.125 Mobility aid accessibility.

(a) (1) General.  All intercity rail cars, other than level entry cars, required to be accessible by §§ 38.111 (a) and (e) of this subpart shall provide a level-change mechanism or boarding device (e.g., lift, ramp or bridge plate) complying with either paragraph (b) or (c) of this section and sufficient clearances to permit a wheelchair or other mobility aid user to reach a seating location complying with paragraph (d) of this section.

(2) Exception.  If level-entry boarding, portable or platform lifts, ramps or bridge plates meeting the applicable requirements of this section are provided on station platforms or other stops required to be accessible, or mini-high platforms complying with § 38.113(d) are provided, the car is not required to be equipped with a car-borne device. The access systems or devices used at a station to which section 37.42 applies must permit compliance with that section.

(b) Car Lift —(1) Design load.  The design load of the lift shall be at least 600 pounds. Working parts, such as cables, pulleys, and shafts, which can be expected to wear, and upon which the lift depends for support of the load, shall have a safety factor of at least six, based on the ultimate strength of the material. Nonworking parts, such as platform, frame, and attachment hardware which would not be expected to wear, shall have a safety factor of at least three, based on the ultimate strength of the material.

(2) Controls —(i) Requirements.  The controls shall be interlocked with the car brakes, propulsion system, or door, or shall provide other appropriate mechanisms or systems, to ensure that the car cannot be moved when the lift is not stowed and so the lift cannot be deployed unless the interlocks or systems are engaged. The lift shall deploy to all platform levels normally encountered in the operating environment. Where provided, each control for deploying, lowering, raising, and stowing the lift and lowering the roll-off barrier shall be of a monetary contact type requiring continuous manual pressure by the operator and shall not allow improper lift sequencing when the lift platform is occupied. The controls shall allow reversal of the lift operation sequence, such as raising or lowering a platform that is part way down, without allowing an occupied platform to fold or retract into the stowed position.

(ii) Exception.  Where physical or safety constraints prevent the deployment at some stops of a lift having its long dimension perpendicular to the car axis, the transportation entity may specify a lift which is designed to deploy with its long dimension parallel to the car axis and which pivots into or out of the car while occupied (i.e., “rotary lift”). The requirements of paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section prohibiting the lift from being stowed while occupied shall not apply to a lift design of this type if the stowed position is within the passenger compartment and the lift is intended to be stowed while occupied.

(iii) Exception.  The brake or propulsion system interlocks requirement does not apply to platform mounted or portable lifts provided that a mechanical, electrical or other system operates to ensure that cars do not move when the lift is in use.

(3) Emergency operation.  The lift shall incorporate an emergency method of deploying, lowering to ground or station platform level with a lift occupant, and raising and stowing the empty lift if the power to the lift fails. No emergency method, manual or otherwise, shall be capable of being operated in a manner that could be hazardous to the lift occupant or to the operator when operated according to manufacturer's instructions, and shall not permit the platform to be stowed or folded when occupied, unless the lift is a rotary lift and is intended to be stowed while occupied.

(4) Power or equipment failure.  Platforms stowed in a vertical position, and deployed platforms when occupied, shall have provisions to prevent their deploying, falling, or folding any faster than 12 inches/second or their dropping of an occupant in the event of a single failure of any load carrying component.

(5) Platform barriers.  The lift platform shall be equipped with barriers to prevent any of the wheels of a wheelchair or mobility aid from rolling off the lift during its operation. A movable barrier or inherent design feature shall prevent a wheelchair or mobility aid from rolling off the edge closest to the car until the lift is in its fully raised position. Each side of the lift platform which, in its raised position, extends beyond the car shall have a barrier a minimum 11⁄2 inches high. Such barriers shall not interfere with maneuvering into or out of the car. The loading-edge barrier (outer barrier) which functions as a loading ramp when the lift is at ground or station platform level, shall be sufficient when raised or closed, or a supplementary system shall be provided, to prevent a power wheelchair or mobility aid from riding over or defeating it. The outer barrier of the lift shall automatically rise or close, or a supplementary system shall automatically engage, and remain raised, closed, or engaged at all times that the lift platform is more than 3 inches above the station platform and the lift is occupied. Alternatively, a barrier or system may be raised, lowered, opened, closed, engaged or disengaged by the lift operator provided an interlock or inherent design feature prevents the lift from rising unless the barrier is raised or closed or the supplementary system is engaged.

(6) Platform surface.  The lift platform surface shall be free of any protrusions over 1⁄4 inch high and shall be slip resistant. The lift platform shall have a minimum clear width of 281⁄2 inches at the platform, a minimum clear width of 30 inches measured from 2 inches above the lift platform surface to 30 inches above the surface, and a minimum clear length of 48 inches measured from 2 inches above the surface of the platform to 30 inches above the surface. (See Fig. 1.)

(7) Platform gaps.  Any openings between the lift platform surface and the raised barriers shall not exceed 5⁄8 inch wide. When the lift is at car floor height with the inner barrier (if applicable) down or retracted, gaps between the forward lift platform edge and car floor shall not exceed 1⁄2 inch horizontally and 5⁄8 inch vertically.

(8) Platform entrance ramp.  The entrance ramp, or loading-edge barrier used as a ramp, shall not exceed a slope of 1:8, when measured on level ground, for a maximum rise of 3 inches, and the transition from station platform to ramp may be vertical without edge treatment up to 1⁄4 inch. Thresholds between 1⁄4 inch and 1⁄2 inch high shall be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2.

(9) Platform deflection.  The lift platform (not including the entrance ramp) shall not deflect more than 3 degrees (exclusive of car roll) in any direction between its unloaded position and its position when loaded with 600 pounds applied through a 26 inch by 26 inch test pallet at the centroid of the lift platform.

(10) Platform movement.  No part of the platform shall move at a rate exceeding 6 inches/second during lowering and lifting an occupant, and shall not exceed 12 inches/second during deploying or stowing. This requirement does not apply to the deployment or stowage cycles of lifts that are manually deployed or stowed. The maximum platform horizontal and vertical acceleration when occupied shall be 0.3g.

(11) Boarding direction.  The lift shall permit both inboard and outboard facing of wheelchairs and mobility aids.

(12) Use by standees.  Lifts shall accommodate persons using walkers, crutches, canes or braces or who otherwise have difficulty using steps. The lift may be marked to indicate a preferred standing position.

(13) Handrails.  Platforms on lifts shall be equipped with handrails, on two sides, which move in tandem with the lift, and which shall be graspable and provide support to standees throughout the entire lift operation. Handrails shall have a usable component at least 8 inches long with the lowest portion a minimum 30 inches above the platform and the highest portion a maximum 38 inches above the platform. The handrails shall be capable of withstanding a force of 100 pounds concentrated at any point on the handrail without permanent deformation of the rail or its supporting structure. The handrail shall have a cross-sectional diameter between 11⁄4 inches and 11⁄2 inches or shall provide an equivalent grasping surface, and have eased edges with corner radii of not less than 1⁄8 inch. Handrails shall be placed to provide a minimum 11⁄2 inches knuckle clearance from the nearest adjacent surface. Handrails shall not interfere with wheelchair or mobility aid maneuverability when entering or leaving the car.

(c) Car ramp or bridge plate —(1) Design load.  Ramps or bridge plates 30 inches or longer shall support a load of 600 pounds, placed at the centroid of the ramp or bridge plate distributed over an area of 26 inches by 26 inches, with a safety factor of at least 3 based on the ultimate strength of the material. Ramps or bridge plates shorter than 30 inches shall support a load of 300 pounds.

(2) Ramp surface.  The ramp or bridge plate surface shall be continuous and slip resistant, shall not have protrusions from the surface greater than 1⁄4 inch high, shall have a clear width of 30 inches and shall accommodate both four-wheel and three-wheel mobility aids.

(3) Ramp threshold.  The transition from station platform to the ramp or bridge plate and the transition from car floor to the ramp or bridge plate may be vertical without edge treatment up to 1⁄4 inch. Changes in level between 1⁄4 inch and 1⁄2 inch shall be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2.

(4) Ramp barriers.  Each side of the ramp or bridge plate shall have barriers at least 2 inches high to prevent mobility aid wheels from slipping off.

(5) Slope.  Ramps or bridge plates shall have the least slope practicable. If the height of the vehicle floor, under 50% passenger load, from which the ramp is deployed is 3 inches or less above the station platform a maximum slope of 1:4 is permitted; if the height of the vehicle floor, under 50% passenger load, from which the ramp is deployed is 6 inches or less, but more than 3 inches, above the station platform a maximum slope of 1:6 is permitted; if the height of the vehicle floor, under 50% passenger load, from which the ramp is deployed is 9 inches or less, but more than 6 inches, above the station platform a maximum slope of 1:8 is permitted; if the height of the vehicle floor, under 50% passenger load, from which the ramp is deployed is greater than 9 inches above the station platform a slope of 1:12 shall be achieved. Folding or telescoping ramps are permitted provided they meet all structural requirements of this section.

(6) Attachment —(i) Requirement.  When in use for boarding or alighting, the ramp or bridge plate shall be attached to the vehicle, or otherwise prevented from moving such that it is not subject to displacement when loading or unloading a heavy power mobility aid and that any gaps between vehicle and ramp or bridge plate, and station platform and ramp or bridge plate, shall not exceed 5⁄8 inch.

(ii) Exception.  Ramps or bridge plates which are attached to, and deployed from, station platforms are permitted in lieu of car devices provided they meet the displacement requirements of paragraph (c)(6)(i) of this section.

(7) Stowage.  A compartment, securement system, or other appropriate method shall be provided to ensure that stowed ramps or bridge plates, including portable ramps or bridge plates stowed in the passenger area, do not impinge on a passenger's wheelchair or mobility aid or pose any hazard to passengers in the event of a sudden stop.

(8) Handrails.  If provided, handrails shall allow persons with disabilities to grasp them from outside the car while starting to board, and to continue to use them throughout the boarding process, and shall have the top between 30 inches and 38 inches above the ramp surface. The handrails shall be capable of withstanding a force of 100 pounds concentrated at any point on the handrail without permanent deformation of the rail or its supporting structure. The handrail shall have a cross-sectional diameter between 11⁄4 inches and 11⁄2 inches or shall provide an equivalent grasping surface, and have eased edges with corner radii of not less than 1⁄8 inch. Handrails shall not interfere with wheelchair or mobility aid maneuverability when entering or leaving the car.

(d) Seating —(1) Requirements.  All intercity rail cars required to be accessible by §§ 38.111 (a) and (e) of this subpart shall provide at least one, but not more than two, mobility aid seating location(s) complying with paragraph (d)(2) of this section; and at least one, but not more than two, seating location(s) complying with paragraph (d)(3) of this section which adjoin or overlap an accessible route with a minimum clear width of 32 inches.

(2) Wheelchair or mobility aid spaces.  Spaces for persons who wish to remain in their wheelchairs or mobility aids shall have a minimum clear floor space 48 inches by 30 inches. Such spaces shall adjoin, and may overlap, an accessible path. Not more than 6 inches of the required clear floor space may be accommodated for footrests under another seat provided there is a minimum of 9 inches from the floor to the lowest part of the seat overhanging the space. Seating spaces may have fold-down or removable seats to accommodate other passengers when a wheelchair or mobility aid user is not occupying the area, provided the seats, when folded up, do not obstruct the clear floor space provided (See Fig. 2).

(3) Other spaces.  Spaces for individuals who wish to transfer shall include a regular coach seat or dining car booth or table seat and space to fold and store the passenger's wheelchair.

[56 FR 45756, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 58 FR 63103, Nov. 30, 1993; 76 FR 57939, Sept. 19, 2011]

§ 38.127 Sleeping compartments.

(a) Sleeping compartments required to be accessible shall be designed so as to allow a person using a wheelchair or mobility aid to enter, maneuver within and approach and use each element within such compartment. (See Fig. 5.)

(b) Each accessible compartment shall contain a restroom complying with § 38.123(a) which can be entered directly from such compartment.

(c) Controls and operating mechanisms (e.g., heating and air conditioning controls, lighting controls, call buttons, electrical outlets, etc.) shall be mounted no more than 48 inches, and no less than 15 inches, above the floor and shall have a clear floor area directly in front a minimum of 30 inches by 48 inches. Controls and operating mechanisms shall be operable with one hand and shall not require tight grasping, pinching, or twisting of the wrist.

Subpart G—Over-the-Road Buses and Systems

§ 38.151 General.

(a) New, used and remanufactured over-the-road buses, to be considered accessible by regulations in part 37 of this title, shall comply with this subpart.

(b) Over-the-road buses covered by § 37.7 (c) of this title shall comply with § 38.23 and this subpart.

§ 38.153 Doors, steps and thresholds.

(a) Floor surfaces on aisles, step treads and areas where wheelchair and mobility aid users are to be accommodated shall be slip-resistant.

(b) All step edges shall have a band of color(s) running the full width of the step which contrasts from the step tread and riser, either dark-on-light or light-on-dark.

(c) (1) Doors shall have a minimum clear width when open of 30 inches (760 mm), measured from the lowest step to a height of at least 48 inches (1220 mm), from which point they may taper to a minimum width of 18 inches (457 mm). The clear width may be reduced by a maximum of 4 inches (100 mm) by protrusions of hinges or other operating mechanisms.

(2) Exception.  Where compliance with the door width requirement of paragraph (c)(1) of this section is not feasible, the minimum door width shall be 27 in (685 mm).

(d) The overhead clearance between the top of the lift door opening and the sill shall be the maximum practicable but not less than 65 inches (1651 mm).

[56 FR 45756, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 63 FR 51698, 51702, Sept. 28, 1998]

§ 38.155 Interior circulation, handrails and stanchions.

(a) Handrails and stanchions shall be provided in the entrance to the vehicle in a configuration which allows passengers to grasp such assists from outside the vehicle while starting to board, and to continue using such handrails or stanchions throughout the boarding process. Handrails shall have a cross-sectional diameter between 11⁄4 inches and 11⁄2 inches or shall provide an equivalent grasping surface, and have eased edges with corner radii of not less than 1⁄8 inch. Handrails shall be placed to provide a minimum 11⁄2 inches knuckle clearance from the nearest adjacent surface. Where on-board fare collection devices are used, a horizontal passenger assist shall be located between boarding passengers and the fare collection device and shall prevent passengers from sustaining injuries on the fare collection device or windshield in the event of a sudden deceleration. Without restricting the vestibule space, the assist shall provide support for a boarding passenger from the door through the boarding procedure. Passengers shall be able to lean against the assist for security while paying fares.

(b) Where provided within passenger compartments, handrails or stanchions shall be sufficient to permit safe on-board circulation, seating and standing assistance, and alighting by persons with disabilities.

§ 38.157 Lighting.

(a) Any stepwell or doorway immediately adjacent to the driver shall have, when the door is open, at least 2 foot-candles of illumination measured on the step tread.

(b) The vehicle doorway shall have outside light(s) which, when the door is open, provide at least 1 foot-candle of illumination on the pathway to the door for a distance of 3 feet (915 mm) to the bottom step tread or lift outer edge. Such light(s) shall be shielded to protect the eyes of entering and exiting passengers.

[56 FR 45756, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 63 FR 51698, 51702, Sept. 28, 1998]

§ 38.159 Mobility aid accessibility.

(a) (1) General.  All vehicles covered by this subpart shall provide a level-change mechanism or boarding device (e.g., lift or ramp) complying with paragraph (b) or (c) of this section and sufficient clearances to permit a wheelchair or other mobility aid user to reach a securement location. At least two securement locations and devices, complying with paragraph (d) of this section, shall be provided.

(2) Exception.  If portable or station-based lifts, ramps or bridge plates meeting the applicable requirements of this section are provided at stations or other stops required to be accessible under regulations issued by the Department of Transportation, the bus is not required to be equipped with a vehicle-borne device.

(b) Vehicle lift —(1) Design load.  The design load of the lift shall be at least 600 pounds (2665 N). Working parts, such as cables, pulleys, and shafts, which can be expected to wear, and upon which the lift depends for support of the load, shall have a safety factor of at least six, based on the ultimate strength of the material. Nonworking parts, such as platform, frame and attachment hardware which would not be expected to wear, shall have a safety factor of at least three, based on the ultimate strength of the material.

(2) Controls —(i) Requirements.  The controls shall be interlocked with the vehicle brakes, transmission, or door, or shall provide other appropriate mechanisms or systems, to ensure that the vehicle cannot be moved when the lift is not stowed and so the lift cannot be deployed unless the interlocks or systems are engaged. The lift shall deploy to all levels (i.e., ground, curb, and intermediate positions) normally encountered in the operating environment. Where provided, each control for deploying, lowering, raising, and stowing the lift and lowering the roll-off barrier shall be of a momentary contact type requiring continuous manual pressure by the operator and shall not allow improper lift sequencing when the lift platform is occupied. The controls shall allow reversal of the lift operation sequence, such as raising or lowering a platform that is part way down, without allowing an occupied platform to fold or retract into the stowed position.

(ii) Exception.  Where the lift is designed to deploy with its long dimension parallel to the vehicle axis and which pivots into or out of the vehicle while occupied (i.e., “rotary lift”), the requirements of this paragraph (b)(2) prohibiting the lift from being stowed while occupied shall not apply if the stowed position is within the passenger compartment and the lift is intended to be stowed while occupied.

(3) Emergency operation.  The lift shall incorporate an emergency method of deploying, lowering to ground level with a lift occupant, and raising and stowing the empty lift if the power to the lift fails. No emergency method, manual or otherwise, shall be capable of being operated in a manner that could be hazardous to the lift occupant or to the operator when operated according to manufacturer's instructions, and shall not permit the platform to be stowed or folded when occupied, unless the lift is a rotary lift and is intended to be stowed while occupied.

(4) Power or equipment failure.  Platforms stowed in a vertical position, and deployed platforms when occupied, shall have provisions to prevent their deploying, falling, or folding any faster than 12 inches/second (305 mm/sec) or their dropping of an occupant in the event of a single failure of any load carrying component.

(5) Platform barriers.  The lift platform shall be equipped with barriers to prevent any of the wheels of a wheelchair or mobility aid from rolling off the platform during its operation. A movable barrier or inherent design feature shall prevent a wheelchair or mobility aid from rolling off the edge closest to the vehicle until the platform is in its fully raised position. Each side of the lift platform which extends beyond the vehicle in its raised position shall have a barrier a minimum 11⁄2 inches (13 mm) high. Such barriers shall not interfere with maneuvering into or out of the aisle. The loading-edge barrier (outer barrier) which functions as a loading ramp when the lift is at ground level, shall be sufficient when raised or closed, or a supplementary system shall be provided, to prevent a power wheelchair or mobility aid from riding over or defeating it. The outer barrier of the lift shall automatically raise or close, or a supplementary system shall automatically engage, and remain raised, closed, or engaged at all times that the platform is more than 3 inches (75 mm) above the roadway or sidewalk and the platform is occupied. Alternatively, a barrier or system may be raised, lowered, opened, closed, engaged, or disengaged by the lift operator, provided an interlock or inherent design feature prevents the lift from rising unless the barrier is raised or closed or the supplementary system is engaged.

(6) Platform surface.  The platform surface shall be free of any protrusions of 1⁄4 inch (6.5 mm) high and shall be slip resistant. The platform shall have a minimum clear width of 281⁄2 inches (725 mm) at the platform, a minimum clear width of 30 inches (760 mm) measured from 2 inches (50 mm) above the platform surface to 30 inches (760 mm) above the platform, and a minimum clear length of 48 inches (1220 mm) measured from 2 inches (50 mm) above the surface of the platform to 30 inches (760 mm) above the surface of the platform. (See Figure 1 to this part.)

(7) Platform gaps.  Any openings between the platform surface and the raised barriers shall not exceed 5⁄8 inch (16 mm) in width. When the platform is at vehicle floor height with the inner barrier (if applicable) down or retracted, gaps between the forward lift platform edge and the vehicle floor shall not exceed 1⁄2 inch (13 mm) horizontally and 5⁄8 inch (16 mm) vertically. Platforms on semi-automatic lifts may have a hand hold not exceeding 11⁄2 inches (28 mm) by 41⁄2 inches (113 mm) located between the edge barriers.

(8) Platform entrance ramp.  The entrance ramp, or loading-edge barrier used as a ramp, shall not exceed a slope of 1:8, measured on level ground, for a maximum rise of 3 inches (75 mm), and the transition from roadway or sidewalk to ramp may be vertical without edge treatment up to 1⁄4 inch (6.5 mm) . Thresholds between 1⁄4 inch (6.5 mm) and 1⁄2 inch (13 mm) high shall be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2.

(9) Platform deflection.  The lift platform (not including the entrance ramp) shall not deflect more than 3 degrees (exclusive of vehicle roll or pitch) in any direction between its unloaded position and its position when loaded with 600 pounds (2665 N) applied through a 26 inch (660 mm) by 26 inch test pallet at the centroid of the platform.

(10) Platform movement.  No part of the platform shall move at a rate exceeding 6 inches/second (150 mm/sec) during lowering and lifting an occupant, and shall not exceed 12 inches/second (300 mm/sec) during deploying or stowing. This requirement does not apply to the deployment or stowage cycles of lifts that are manually deployed or stowed. The maximum platform horizontal and vertical acceleration when occupied shall be 0.3g.

(11) Boarding direction.  The lift shall permit both inboard and outboard facing of wheelchair and mobility aid users.

(12) Use by standees.  Lifts shall accommodate persons using walkers, crutches, canes or braces or who otherwise have difficulty using steps. The platform may be marked to indicate a preferred standing position.

(13) Handrails.  Platforms on lifts shall be equipped with handrails on two sides, which move in tandem with the lift, and which shall be graspable and provide support to standees throughout the entire lift operation. Handrails shall have a usable component at least 8 inches (200 mm) long with the lowest portion a minimum 30 inches (760 mm) above the platform and the highest portion a maximum 38 inches (965 mm) above the platform. The handrails shall be capable of withstanding a force of 100 pounds (445 N) concentrated at any point on the handrail without permanent deformation of the rail or its supporting structure. The handrail shall have a cross-sectional diameter between 11⁄4 inches (32 mm) and 11⁄2 inches (38 mm) or shall provide an equivalent grasping surface, and have eased edges with corner radii of not less than 5⁄8 inch (3.5 mm). Handrails shall be placed to provide a minimum 11⁄2 inches (38 mm) knuckle clearance from the nearest adjacent surface. Handrails shall not interfere with wheelchair or mobility aid maneuverability when entering or leaving the vehicle.

(c) Vehicle ramp —(1) Design load.  Ramps 30 inches (760 mm) or longer shall support a load of 600 pounds (2665 N), placed at the centroid of the ramp distributed over an area of 26 inches by 26 inches (660 mm by 660 mm), with a safety factor of at least 3 based on the ultimate strength of the material. Ramps shorter than 30 inches (760 mm) shall support a load of 300 pounds (1332 N).

(2) Ramp surface.  The ramp surface shall be continuous and slip resistant; shall not have protrusions from the surface greater than 1⁄4 inch (6.5 mm) high; shall have a clear width of 30 inches (760 mm); and shall accommodate both four-wheel and three-wheel mobility aids.

(3) Ramp threshold.  The transition from roadway or sidewalk and the transition from vehicle floor to the ramp may be vertical without edge treatment up to 1⁄4 inch (6.5 mm). Changes in level between 1⁄4 inch (6.5 mm) and 1⁄2 inch (13 mm) shall be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2.

(4) Ramp barriers.  Each side of the ramp shall have barriers at least 2 inches (50 mm) high to prevent mobility aid wheels from slipping off.

(5) Slope.  Ramps shall have the least slope practicable and shall not exceed 1:4 when deployed to ground level. If the height of the vehicle floor from which the ramp is deployed is 3 inches (75 mm) or less above a 6 inch (150 mm) curb, a maximum slope of 1:4 is permitted; if the height of the vehicle floor from which the ramp is deployed is 6 inches (150 mm) or less, but greater than 3 inches (75 mm), above a 6 inch (150 mm) curb, a maximum slope of 1:6 is permitted; if the height of the vehicle floor from which the ramp is deployed is 9 inches (225 mm) or less, but greater than 6 inches (150 mm), above a 6 inch curb, a maximum slope of 1:8 is permitted; if the height of the vehicle floor from which the ramp is deployed is greater than 9 inches (225 mm) above a 6 inch (150 mm) curb, a slope of 1:12 shall be achieved. Folding or telescoping ramps are permitted provided they meet all structural requirements of this section.

(6) Attachment.  When in use for boarding or alighting, the ramp shall be firmly attached to the vehicle so that it is not subject to displacement when loading or unloading a heavy power mobility aid and that no gap between vehicle and ramp exceeds 5⁄8 inch (16 mm).

(7) Stowage.  A compartment, securement system, or other appropriate method shall be provided to ensure that stowed ramps, including portable ramps stowed in the passenger area, do not impinge on a passenger's wheelchair or mobility aid or pose any hazard to passengers in the event of a sudden stop or maneuver.

(8) Handrails.  If provided, handrails shall allow persons with disabilities to grasp them from outside the vehicle while starting to board, and to continue to use them throughout the boarding process, and shall have the top between 30 inches (760 mm) above the ramp surface. The handrails shall be capable of withstanding a force of 100 pounds (445 N) concentrated at any point on the handrail without permanent deformation of the rail or its supporting structure. The handrail shall have a cross-sectional diameter between 11⁄4 inches (32 mm) and 11⁄2 inches (38 mm) or shall provide an equivalent grasping surface, and have eased edges with corner radii of not less than 1⁄8 inch (3.5 mm). Handrails shall not interfere with wheelchair or mobility aid maneuverability when entering or leaving the vehicle.

(d) Securement devices —(1) Design load.  Securement systems, and their attachments to vehicles, shall restrain a force in the forward longitudinal direction of up to 2,000 pounds (8,880 N) per securement leg or clamping mechanism and a minimum of 4,000 pounds (17,760 N) for each mobility aid.

(2) Location and size.  The securement system shall be placed as near to the accessible entrance as practicable and shall have a clear floor area of 30 inches (760 mm) by 48 inches (1220 mm). Such space shall adjoin, and may overlap, an access path. Not more than 6 inches (150 mm) of the required clear floor space may be accommodated for footrests under another seat, modesty panel, or other fixed element provided there is a minimum of 9 inches (230 mm) from the floor to the lowest part of the seat overhanging the space. Securement areas may have fold-down seats to accommodate other passengers when a wheelchair or mobility aid is not occupying the area, provided the seats, when folded up, do not obstruct the clear floor space required. (See Figure 2 to this part.)

(3) Mobility aids accommodated.  The securement system shall secure common wheelchairs and mobility aids and shall either be automatic or easily attached by a person familiar with the system and mobility aid and having average dexterity.

(4) Orientation.  At least one securement device or system required by paragraph (a) of this section shall secure the wheelchair or mobility aid facing toward the front of the vehicle. Additional securement devices or systems shall secure the wheelchair or mobility aid facing forward or rearward. Where the wheelchair or mobility aid is secured facing the rear of the vehicle, a padded barrier shall be provided. The padded barrier shall extend from a height of 38 inches (965 mm) from the vehicle floor to a height of 56 inches (1420 mm) from the vehicle floor with a width of 18 inches (455 mm), laterally centered immediately in back of the seated individual. Such barriers need not be solid provided equivalent protection is afforded.

(5) Movement.  When the wheelchair or mobility aid is secured in accordance with manufacturer's instructions, the securement system shall limit the movement of an occupied wheelchair or mobility aid to no more than 2 inches (50 mm) in any direction under normal vehicle operating conditions.

(6) Stowage.  When not being used for securement, or when the securement area can be used by standees, the securement system shall not interfere with passenger movement, shall not present any hazardous condition, shall be reasonably protected from vandalism, and shall be readily accessed when needed for use.

(7) Seat belt and shoulder harness.  For each wheelchair or mobility aid securement device provided, a passenger seat belt and shoulder harness, complying with all applicable provisions of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (49 CFR part 571), shall also be provided for use by wheelchair or mobility aid users. Such seat belts and shoulder harnesses shall not be used in lieu of a device which secures the wheelchair or mobility aid itself.

[63 FR 51698, 51703, Sept. 28, 1998]

§ 38.161 Moveable aisle armrests.

A minimum of 50% of aisle seats, including all moveable or removable seats at wheelchair or mobility aide securement locations, shall have an armrest on the aisle side which can be raised, removed, or retracted to permit easy entry or exit.

[63 FR 51700, 51703, Sept. 28, 1998]

Subpart H—Other Vehicles and Systems

§ 38.171 General.

(a) New, used and remanufactured vehicles and conveyances for systems not covered by other subparts of this part, to be considered accessible by regulations in part 37 of this title shall comply with this subpart.

(b) If portions of the vehicle or conveyance are modified in a way that affects or could affect accessibility, each such portion shall comply, to the extent practicable, with the applicable provisions of this subpart. This provision does not require that inaccessible vehicles be retrofitted with lifts, ramps or other boarding devices.

(c) Requirements for vehicles and systems not covered by this part shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the Department of Transportation in consultation with the U.S. Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board (Access Board).

§ 38.173 Automated guideway transit vehicles and systems.

(a) Automated Guideway Transit (AGT) vehicles and systems, sometimes called “people movers”, operated in airports and other areas where AGT vehicles travel at slow speed (i.e., at a speed of no more than 20 miles per hour at any location on their route during normal operation), shall comply with the provisions of § 38.53 (a) through (c), and §§ 38.55 through 38.61 of this part for rapid rail vehicles and systems.

(b) Where the vehicle covered by paragraph (a) will operate in an accessible station, the design of vehicles shall be coordinated with the boarding platform design such that the horizontal gap between a vehicle door at rest and the platform shall be no greater than 1 inch and the height of the vehicle floor shall be within plus or minus 1⁄2 inch of the platform height under all normal passenger load conditions. Vertical alignment may be accomplished by vehicle air suspension or other suitable means of meeting the requirement.

(c) In stations where open platforms are not protected by platform screens, a suitable device or system shall be provided to prevent, deter or warn individuals from stepping off the platform between cars. Acceptable devices include, but are not limited to, pantograph gates, chains, motion detectors or other appropriate devices.

(d) Light rail and rapid rail AGT vehicles and systems shall comply with subparts D and C of this part, respectively. AGT systems whose vehicles travel at a speed of more than 20 miles per hour at any location on their route during normal operation are covered under this paragraph rather than under paragraph (a) of this section.

[56 FR 45756, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 61 FR 25416, May 21, 1996]

§ 38.175 High-speed rail cars, monorails and systems.

(a) All cars for high-speed rail systems, including but not limited to those using “maglev” or high speed steel-wheel-on-steel rail technology, and monorail systems operating primarily on dedicated rail (i.e., not used by freight trains) or guideway, in which stations are constructed in accordance with part 37, subpart C of this title, shall be designed for high-platform, level boarding and shall comply with § 38.111(a) of this part for each type of car which is similar to intercity rail, §§ 38.111(d), 38.113 (a) through (c) and (e), 38.115 (a) and (b), 38.117 (a) and (b), 38.121 through 38.123, 38.125(d), and 38.127 (if applicable) of this part. The design of cars shall be coordinated with the boarding platform design such that the horizontal gap between a car door at rest and the platform shall be no greater than 3 inches and the height of the car floor shall be within plus or minus 5⁄8 inch of the platform height under all normal passenger load conditions. Vertical alignment may be accomplished by car air suspension or other suitable means of meeting the requirement. All doorways shall have, when the door is open, at least 2 footcandles of illumination measured on the door threshold.

(b) All other high-speed rail cars shall comply with the similar provisions of subpart F of this part.

§ 38.177 Ferries, excursion boats and other vessels. [Reserved]

§ 38.179 Trams, and similar vehicles, and systems

(a) New and used trams consisting of a tractor unit, with or without passenger accommodations, and one or more passenger trailer units, including but not limited to vehicles providing shuttle service to remote parking areas, between hotels and other public accommodations, and between and within amusement parks and other recreation areas, shall comply with this section. For purposes of determining applicability of 49 CFR 37.101, 37.103, or 37.105 the capacity of such a vehicle or “train” shall consist of the total combined seating capacity of all units, plus the driver, prior to any modification for accessibility.

(b) Each tractor unit which accommodates passengers and each trailer unit shall comply with § 38.25 and § 38.29 of this part. In addition, each such unit shall comply with § 38.23 (b) or (c) and shall provide at least one space for wheelchair or mobility aid users complying with § 38.23(d) of this part unless the complete operating unit consisting of tractor and one or more trailers can already accommodate at least two wheelchair or mobility aid users.


PART 236—RULES, STANDARDS, AND INSTRUCTIONS GOVERNING THE INSTALLATION, INSPECTION, MAINTENANCE, AND REPAIR OF SIGNAL AND TRAIN CONTROL SYSTEMS, DEVICES, AND APPLIANCES

Authority:49 U.S.C. 20102-20103, 20107, 20133, 20141, 20157, 20301-20303, 20306, 20501-20505, 20701-20703, 21301-21302, 21304; 28 U.S.C. 2461 note; and 49 CFR 1.89.

Source:33 FR 19684, Dec. 25, 1968, unless otherwise noted.

§ 236.0 Applicability, minimum requirements, and penalties.

(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, this part applies to all railroads and any person as defined in paragraph (f) of this section.

(b) This part does not apply to—

(1) A railroad that operates only on track inside an installation that is not part of the general railroad system of transportation; or

(2) Rapid transit operations in an urban area that are not connected to the general railroad system of transportation.

(c) (1) Prior to January 17, 2012, where a passenger train is operated at a speed of 60 or more miles per hour, or a freight train is operated at a speed of 50 or more miles per hour—

(i) A block signal system complying with the provisions of this part shall be installed; or

(ii) A manual block system shall be placed permanently in effect that shall conform to the following conditions:

(A) A passenger train shall not be admitted to a block occupied by another train except when absolutely necessary and then only by operating at restricted speed;

(B) No train shall be admitted to a block occupied by a passenger train except when absolutely necessary and then only by operating at restricted speed;

(C) No train shall be admitted to a block occupied by an opposing train except when absolutely necessary and then only while one train is stopped and the other is operating at restricted speed; and

(D) A freight train, including a work train, may be authorized to follow a freight train, including a work train, into a block and then only when the following train is operating at restricted speed.

(2) On and after January 17, 2012, where a passenger train is permitted to operate at a speed of 60 or more miles per hour, or a freight train is permitted to operate at a speed of 50 or more miles per hour, a block signal system complying with the provisions of this part shall be installed, unless an FRA approved PTC system meeting the requirements of this part for the subject speed and other operating conditions is installed.

(d) (1) Prior to December 31, 2015, where any train is permitted to operate at a speed of 80 or more miles per hour, an automatic cab signal, automatic train stop, or automatic train control system complying with the provisions of this part shall be installed, unless an FRA approved PTC system meeting the requirements of this part for the subject speed and other operating conditions, is installed.

(2) On and after December 31, 2015, where any train is permitted to operate at a speed of 80 or more miles per hour, a PTC system complying with the provisions of subpart I shall be installed and operational, unless FRA approval to continue to operate with an automatic cab signal, automatic train stop, or automatic train control system complying with the provisions of this part has been justified to, and approved by, the Associate Administrator.

(3) Subpart H of this part sets forth requirements for voluntary installation of PTC systems, and subpart I of this part sets forth requirements for mandated installation of PTC systems, each under conditions specified in their respective subpart.

(e) Nothing in this section authorizes the discontinuance of a block signal system, interlocking, traffic control system, automatic cab signal, automatic train stop or automatic train control system, or PTC system, without approval by the FRA under part 235 of this title. However, a railroad may apply for approval of discontinuance or material modification of a signal or train control system in connection with a request for approval of a Positive Train Control Development Plan (PTCDP) or Positive Train Control Safety Plan (PTCSP) as provided in subpart I of this part.

(f) Any person (an entity of any type covered under 1 U.S.C. 1, including but not limited to the following: a railroad; a manager, supervisor, official, or other employee or agent of a railroad; any owner, manufacturer, lessor, or lessee of railroad equipment, track, or facilities; any independent contractor providing goods or services to a railroad; and any employee of such owner, manufacturer, lessor, lessee, or independent contractor) who violates any requirement of this part or causes the violation of any such requirement is subject to a civil penalty of at least $1,086 and not more than $35,516 per violation, except that: Penalties may be assessed against individuals only for willful violations, and, where a grossly negligent violation or a pattern of repeated violations has created an imminent hazard of death or injury to persons, or has caused death or injury, a penalty not to exceed $142,063 per violation may be assessed. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. See FRA's website at www.fra.dot.gov for a statement of agency civil penalty policy.

(g) A person may also be subject to criminal penalties for knowingly and willfully making a false entry in a record or report required to be made under this part, filing a false record or report, or violating any of the provisions of 49 U.S.C. 21311.

(h) The requirements of subpart H of this part apply to safety-critical processor-based signal and train control systems, including subsystems and components thereof, developed under the terms and conditions of that subpart.

[49 FR 3382, Jan. 26, 1984]

Editorial Note

Editorial Note:

For Federal Register citations affecting § 236.0, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the Finding Aids section of the printed volume and at www.govinfo.gov.

Subpart A—Rules and Instructions: All Systems

General

§ 236.1 Plans, where kept.

As required for maintenance, plans shall be kept at all interlockings, automatic signals and controlled points. Plans shall be legible and correct.

[49 FR 3382, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.2 Grounds.

(a) General.  Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, each circuit, the functioning of which affects the safety of train operations, shall be kept free of any ground or combination of grounds having a current flow of 75 percent or more of the value necessary to retain a permissive state of a safety appliance.

(b) Exception.  Paragraph (a) of this section does not apply to the following:

(1) Circuits that include any track rail;

(2) The common return wires of single-wire, single-break, and signal control circuits using a grounded common;

(3) Circuitry internal to microprocessor-based appliances;

(4) Circuitry internal to semiconductor-based memory; or

(5) Alternating current power distribution circuits that are grounded in the interest of safety.

[79 FR 49715, Aug. 22, 2014]

§ 236.3 Locking of signal apparatus housings.

Signal apparatus housings shall be secured against unauthorized entry.

[49 FR 3382, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.4 Interference with normal functioning of device.

The normal functioning of any device shall not be interfered with in testing or otherwise without first taking measures to provide for safety of train operation which depends on normal functioning of such device.

[49 FR 3382, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.5 Design of control circuits on closed circuit principle.

All control circuits the functioning of which affects safety of train operation shall be designed on the closed circuit principle, except circuits for roadway equipment of intermittent automatic train stop system.

§ 236.6 Hand-operated switch equipped with switch circuit controller.

Hand-operated switch equipped with switch circuit controller connected to the point, or with facing-point lock and circuit controller, shall be so maintained that when point is open one-fourth inch or more on facing-point switch and three-eights inch or more on trailing-point switch, track or control circuits will be opened or shunted or both, and if equipped with facing-point lock with circuit controller, switch cannot be locked. On such hand-operated switch, switch circuit controllers, facing-point locks, switch-and-lock movements, and their connections shall be securely fastened in place, and contacts maintained with an opening of not less than one-sixteenth inch when open.

§ 236.7 Circuit controller operated by switch-and-lock movement.

Circuit controller operated by switch-and-lock movement shall be maintained so that normally open contacts will remain closed and normally closed contacts will remain open until the switch is locked.

§ 236.8 Operating characteristics of electromagnetic, electronic, or electrical apparatus.

Signal apparatus, the functioning of which affects the safety of train operation, shall be maintained in accordance with the limits within which the device is designed to operate.

[49 FR 3382, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.9 Selection of circuits through indicating or annunciating instruments.

Signal control and electric locking circuits shall not be selected through the contacts of instruments designed primarily for indicating or annunciating purposes in which an indicating element attached to the armature is arranged so that it can in itself cause improper operation of the armature.

§ 236.10 Electric locks, force drop type; where required.

Electric locks on new installations and new electric locks applied to existing installations shall be of the forced drop type.

§ 236.11 Adjustment, repair, or replacement of component.

When any component of a signal system, the proper functioning of which is essential to the safety of train operation, fails to perform its intended signaling function or is not in correspondence with known operating conditions, the cause shall be determined and the faulty component adjusted, repaired or replaced without undue delay.

[49 FR 3382, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.12 Spring switch signal protection; where required.

Signal protection shall be provided for facing and trailing movements through spring switch within interlocking limits and through spring switch installed in automatic block signal, train stop, train control or cab signal territory where train movements over the switch are made at a speed exceeding 20 miles per hour, except that signal protection shall be required only with the current of traffic on track signaled for movement in only one direction.

Note:

Does not apply to spring switch installed prior to October 1, 1950 in automatic block signal, automatic train stop, or automatic train control territory.

[49 FR 3383, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.13 Spring switch; selection of signal control circuits through circuit controller.

The control circuits of signals governing facing movements over a main track spring switch shall be selected through the contacts of a switch circuit controller, or through the contacts of relay repeating the position of such circuit controller, which, when normally closed switch point is open one-fourth inch or more, will cause such signals to display their most restrictive aspects, except that where a separate aspect is displayed for facing movements over the switch in the reverse position the signal shall display its most restrictive aspect when the switch points are open one-fourth inch or more from either the normal or reverse position.

§ 236.14 Spring switch signal protection; requirements.

(a) The indication of signal governing movements from siding to main track with the current of traffic on track signaled for movements in only one direction through a spring switch in automatic block signal territory shall be not less restrictive than “Proceed at Restricted Speed' when the block, into which movements are governed by the signal, is occupied, and shall be “Stop” when the main track is occupied by a train approaching the switch within at least 1,500 feet in approach of the approach signal located stopping distance from the main track signal governing trailing movements over switch, except that the indication may be caused to be less restrictive if approach or time locking is used.

(b) The indication of signal governing movements against the current of traffic from the reverse main of main tracks to a single track, or signal governing movements from a siding to a main track signaled for movements in either direction, through a spring switch, in automatic block signal territory, shall be not less restrictive than “Proceed at Restricted Speed” when the block, into which movements are governed by the signal, is occupied by a preceding train, and shall be “Stop” when the block on the single track into which the signal governs is occupied by an opposing train.

(c) The indication of signal governing movements against the current of traffic from the reverse main of main tracks to a single track or signal governing movements from a siding to a main track signaled for movements in either direction through a spring switch in automatic block signal territory shall be “Stop” when the normal direction main track of the double track or the single track signaled for movements in both directions is occupied by a train approaching the switch within at least 1,500 feet in approach of the approach signal located stopping distance from the main track signal governing trailing movements over switch, except that indication may be caused to be less restrictive if approach or time locking is used.

§ 236.15 Timetable instructions.

Automatic block, traffic control, train stop, train control, cab signal, and positive train control territory shall be designated in timetable instructions.

[79 FR 49715, Aug. 22, 2014]

§ 236.16 Electric lock, main track releasing circuit.

When an electric lock releasing circuit is provided on the main track to permit a train or an engine to diverge from the main track without time delay, the circuit shall be of such length to permit occupancy of the circuit to be seen by a crew member stationed at the switch. When the releasing circuit extends into the fouling circuit, a train or engine on the siding shall be prevented from occupying the releasing circuit by a derail either pipe-connected to switch point or equipped with an independently operated electric lock.

[49 FR 3383, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.17 Pipe for operating connections, requirements.

(a) Steel or wrought-iron pipe one inch or larger, or members of equal strength, shall be used for operating connections for switches, derails, movable-point frogs, facing-point locks, rail-locking devices of movable bridge protected by interlocking, and mechanically operated signals, except up-and-down rod which may be three-fourths inch pipe or solid rod. Pipe shall be fully screwed into coupling and both ends of each pipe shall be riveted to pipe plug with 2 rivets.

(b) Pipeline shall not be out of alignment sufficiently to interfere with proper operation, shall be properly compensated for temperature changes, and supported on carriers spaced not more than 8 feet apart on tangent and curve of less than 2° and not more than 7 feet apart on curve of 2° or more. With lever in any position, couplings in pipe line shall not foul carriers.

[49 FR 3383, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.18 Software management control plan.

(a) Within 6 months of June 6, 2005, each railroad shall develop and adopt a software management control plan for its signal and train control systems. A railroad commencing operations after June 6, 2005, shall adopt a software management control plan for its signal and train control systems prior to commencing operations.

(b) Within 30 months of the completion of the software management control plan, each railroad shall have fully implemented such plan.

(c) For purposes of this section, “software management control plan” means a plan designed to ensure that the proper and intended software version for each specific site and location is documented (mapped) and maintained through the life-cycle of the system. The plan must further describe how the proper software configuration is to be identified and confirmed in the event of replacement, modification, or disarrangement of any part of the system.

[70 FR 11095, Mar. 7, 2005]

Roadway Signals and Cab Signals

§ 236.21 Location of roadway signals.

Each roadway signal shall be positioned and aligned so that its aspects can be clearly associated with the track it governs.

[49 FR 3383, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.22 Semaphore signal arm; clearance to other objects.

At least one-half inch clearance shall be provided between semaphore signal arm, and any object that may interfere with its operation.

§ 236.23 Aspects and indications.

(a) Aspects shall be shown by the position of semaphore blades, color of lights, position of lights, flashing of lights, or any combination thereof. They may be qualified by marker plate, number plate, letter plate, marker light, shape and color of semaphore blades or any combination thereof, subject to the following conditions:

(1) Night aspects of roadway signals, except qualifying appurtenances, shall be shown by lights; day aspects by lights or semaphore arms. A single white light shall not be used.

(2) Reflector lenses or buttons or other devices which depend for visibility upon reflected light from an external source shall not be used hereafter in night aspects, except qualifying appurtenances.

(b) The aspects of cab signals shall be shown by lights or by illuminated letters or numbers.

(c) Each aspect displayed by a signal shall be identified by a name and shall indicate action to be taken. Only one name and indication shall apply to those aspects indicating the same action to be taken; the same aspect shall not be used with any other name and indication.

(d) The fundamental indications of signal aspects shall conform to the following:

(1) A red light, a series of horizontal lights or a semaphore blade in a horizontal position shall be used to indicate stop.

(2) A yellow light, a lunar light, or a series of lights or a semaphore blade in the upper or lower quadrant at an angle of approximately 45 degrees to the vertical, shall be used to indicate that speed is to be restricted and stop may be required.

(3) A green light, a series of vertical lights, or a semaphore blade in a vertical position in the upper quadrant or 60° or 90° in the lower quadrant shall be used to indicate proceed at authorized speed.

(e) The names, indications, and aspects of roadway and cab signals shall be defined in the carrier's Operating Rule Book or Special Instructions. Modifications shall be filed with the FRA within thirty days after such modifications become effective.

(f) The absence of a qualifying appurtenance, the failure of a lamp in a light signal, or a false restrictive position of an arm of a semaphore signal shall not cause the display of a less restrictive aspect than intended.

[33 FR 19684, Dec. 25, 1968, as amended at 49 FR 3383, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.24 Spacing of roadway signals.

Each roadway signal shall be located with respect to the next signal or signals in advance which govern train movements in the same direction so that the indication of a signal displaying a restrictive aspect can be complied with by means of a brake application, other than an emergency application, initiated at such signal, either by stopping at the signal where a stop is required, or by a reduction in speed to the rate prescribed by the next signal in advance where reduced speed is required.

§ 236.25 [Reserved]

§ 236.26 Buffing device, maintenance.

Buffing device shall be maintained so as not to cause the signal to display a less restrictive aspect than intended.

Track Circuits

§ 236.51 Track circuit requirements.

Track relay controlling home signals shall be in deenergized position, or device that functions as a track relay controlling home signals shall be in its most restrictive state, and the track circuit of an automatic train stop, train control, or cab signal system shall be deenergized in the rear of the point where any of the following conditions exist:

(a) When a rail is broken or a rail or switch-frog is removed except when a rail is broken or removed in the shunt fouling circuit of a turnout or crossover, provided, however, that shunt fouling circuit may not be used in a turnout through which permissible speed is greater than 45 miles per hour. It shall not be a violation of this requirement if a track circuit is energized:

(1) When a break occurs between the end of rail and track circuit connector; within the limits of rail-joint bond, appliance or other protective device, which provides a bypath for the electric current, or

(2) As result of leakage current or foreign current in the rear of a point where a break occurs.

(b) When a train, locomotive, or car occupies any part of a track circuit, including fouling section of turnout except turnouts of hand-operated main track crossover. It shall not be a violation of this requirement where the presence of sand, rust, dirt, grease, or other foreign matter prevents effective shunting, except that where such conditions are known to exist adequate measures to safeguard train operation must be taken.

(c) Where switch shunting circuit is used:

(1) Switch point is not closed in normal position.

(2) A switch is not locked where facing-point lock with circuit controller is used.

(3) An independently operated fouling-point derail equipped with switch circuit controller is not in derailing position.

[33 FR 19684, Dec. 25, 1968, as amended at 49 FR 3383, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.52 Relayed cut-section.

Where relayed cut-section is used in territory where noncoded direct-current track circuits are in use the energy circuit to the adjoining track shall be open and the track circuit shunted when the track relay at such cut-section is in deenergized position.

§ 236.53 Track circuit feed at grade crossing.

At grade crossing with an electric railroad where foreign current is present, the electric energy for noncoded direct current track circuit shall feed away from the crossing.

§ 236.54 Minimum length of track circuit.

When a track circuit shorter than maximum inner wheelbase of any locomotive or car operated over such track circuit is used for control of signaling facilities, other means shall be used to provide the equivalent of track circuit protection.

[49 FR 3383, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.55 Dead section; maximum length.

Where dead section exceeds 35 feet, a special circuit shall be installed. Where shortest outer wheelbase of a locomotive operating over such dead section is less than 35 feet, the maximum length of the dead section shall not exceed the length of the outer wheelbase of such locomotive unless special circuit is used.

[49 FR 3383, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.56 Shunting sensitivity.

Each track circuit controlling home signal or approach locking shall be so maintained that track relay is in deenergized position, or device that functions as a track relay shall be in its most restrictive state if, when track circuit is dry, a shunt of 0.06 ohm resistance is connected across the track rails of the circuit, including fouling sections of turnouts.

[49 FR 3383, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.57 Shunt and fouling wires.

(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, shunt wires and fouling wires hereafter installed or replaced shall consist of at least two discrete conductors, and each shall be of sufficient conductivity and maintained in such condition that the track relay will be in deenergized position, or device that functions as a track relay will be in its most restrictive state, when the circuit is shunted.

(b) This rule does not apply to shunt wires where track or control circuit is opened by the switch circuit controller.

[49 FR 3383, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.58 Turnout, fouling section.

Rail joints within the fouling section shall be bonded, and fouling section shall extend at least to a point where sufficient tract centers and allowance for maximum car overhang and width will prevent interference with train, locomotive, or car movement on the adjacent track.

[49 FR 3383, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.59 Insulated rail joints.

Insulated rail joints shall be maintained in condition to prevent sufficient track circuit current from flowing between the rails separated by the insulation to cause a failure of any track circuit involved.

§ 236.60 Switch shunting circuit; use restricted.

Switch shunting circuit shall not be hereafter installed, except where tract or control circuit is opened by the circuit controller.

[49 FR 3384, Jan. 26, 1984]

Wires and Cables

§ 236.71 Signal wires on pole line and aerial cable.

Signal wire on pole line shall be securely tied in on insulator properly fastened to crossarm or bracket supported by pole or other support. Signal wire shall not interfere with, or be interfered by, other wires on the pole line. Aerial cable shall be supported by messenger.

[49 FR 3384, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.72 [Reserved]

§ 236.73 Open-wire transmission line; clearance to other circuits.

Open-wire transmission line operating at voltage of 750 volts or more shall be placed not less than 4 feet above the nearest crossarm carrying signal or communication circuits.

§ 236.74 Protection of insulated wire; splice in underground wire.

Insulated wire shall be protected from mechanical injury. The insulation shall not be punctured for test purposes. Splice in underground wire shall have insulation resistance at least equal to the wire spliced.

§ 236.75 [Reserved]

§ 236.76 Tagging of wires and interference of wires or tags with signal apparatus.

Each wire shall be tagged or otherwise so marked that it can be identified at each terminal. Tags and other marks of identification shall be made of insulating material and so arranged that tags and wires do not interfere with moving parts of apparatus.

[49 FR 3384, Jan. 26, 1984]

Inspections and Tests; All Systems

§ 236.101 Purpose of inspection and tests; removal from service of relay or device failing to meet test requirements.

The following inspections and tests shall be made in accordance with specifications of the carrier, subject to approval of the FRA, to determine if the apparatus and/or equipment is maintained in condition to perform its intended function. Electronic device, relay, or other electromagnetic device which fails to meet the requirements of specified tests shall be removed from service, and shall not be restored to service until its operating characteristics are in accordance with the limits within which such device or relay is designed to operate.

[49 FR 3384, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.102 Semaphore or searchlight signal mechanism.

(a) Semaphore signal mechanism shall be inspected at least once every six months, and tests of the operating characteristics of all parts shall be made at least once every two years.

(b) Searchlight signal mechanism shall be inspected, and the mechanical movement shall be observed while operating the mechanism to all positions, at least once every six months. Tests of the operating characteristics shall be made at least once every two years.

[49 FR 3384, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.103 Switch circuit controller or point detector.

Switch circuit controller, circuit controller, or point detector operated by hand-operated switch or by power-operated or mechanically-operated switch-and-lock movement shall be inspected and tested at least once every three months.

[49 FR 3384, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.104 Shunt fouling circuit.

Shunt fouling circuit shall be inspected and tested at least once every three months.

§ 236.105 Electric lock.

Electric lock, except forced-drop type, shall be tested at least once every two years.

§ 236.106 Relays.

Each relay, the functioning of which affects the safety of train operations, shall be tested at least once every four years except:

(a) Alternating current centrifugal type relay shall be tested at least once every 12 months;

(b) Alternating current vane type relay and direct current polar type relay shall be tested at least once every 2 years; and

(c) Relay with soft iron magnetic structure shall be tested at least once every 2 years.

[49 FR 3384, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.107 Ground tests.

(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, a test for grounds on each energy bus furnishing power to circuits, the functioning of which affects the safety of train operation, shall be made when such energy bus is placed in service, and shall be made at least once every three months thereafter.

(b) The provisions of this rule shall not apply to track circuit wires, common return wires of grounded common single-break circuits, or alternating current power distribution circuits grounded in the interest of safety.

[49 FR 3384, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.108 Insulation resistance tests, wires in trunking and cables.

(a) Insulation resistance of wires and cables, except wires connected directly to track rails, shall be tested when wires, cables, and insulation are dry. Insulation resistance tests shall be made between all conductors and ground, and between conductors in each multiple conductor cable, and between conductors in trunking, when wires or cables are installed and at least once every ten years thereafter.

(b) Then insulation resistance of wire or cable is found to be less than 500,000 ohms, prompt action shall be taken to repair or replace the defective wire or cable and until such defective wire or cable is replaced, insulation resistance test shall be made annually.

(c) In no case shall a circuit be permitted to function on a conductor having an insulation resistance to ground or between conductors of less than 200,000 ohms during the period required for repair or replacement.

[49 FR 3384, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.109 Time releases, timing relays and timing devices.

Time releases, timing relays and timing devices shall be tested at least once every twelve months. The timing shall be maintained at not less than 90 percent of the predetermined time interval, which shall be shown on the plans or marked on the time release, timing relay, or timing device.

[49 FR 3384, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.110 Results of tests.

(a) Results of tests made in compliance with §§ 236.102 to 236.109, inclusive; 236.376 to 236.387, inclusive; 236.576; 236.577; 236.586 to 236.589, inclusive; and 236.917(a) must be recorded on preprinted forms provided by the railroad or by electronic means, subject to approval by the FRA Associate Administrator for Safety. These records must show the name of the railroad, place and date, equipment tested, results of tests, repairs, replacements, adjustments made, and condition in which the apparatus was left. Each record must be:

(1) Signed by the employee making the test, or electronically coded or identified by number of the automated test equipment (where applicable);

(2) Unless otherwise noted, filed in the office of a supervisory official having jurisdiction; and

(3) Available for inspection and replication by FRA and FRA-certified State inspectors.

(b) Results of tests made in compliance with § 236.587 must be retained for 92 days.

(c) Results of tests made in compliance with § 236.917(a) must be retained as follows:

(1) Results of tests that pertain to installation or modification must be retained for the life-cycle of the equipment tested and may be kept in any office designated by the railroad; and

(2) Results of periodic tests required for maintenance or repair of the equipment tested must be retained until the next record is filed but in no case less than one year.

(d) Results of all other tests listed in this section must be retained until the next record is filed but in no case less than one year.

(e) Electronic or automated tracking systems used to meet the requirements contained in paragraph (a) of this section must be capable of being reviewed and monitored by FRA at any time to ensure the integrity of the system. FRA's Associate Administrator for Safety may prohibit or revoke a railroad's authority to utilize an electronic or automated tracking system in lieu of preprinted forms if FRA finds that the electronic or automated tracking system is not properly secured, is inaccessible to FRA, FRA-certified State inspectors, or railroad employees requiring access to discharge their assigned duties, or fails to adequately track and monitor the equipment. The Associate Administrator for Safety will provide the affected railroad with a written statement of the basis for his or her decision prohibiting or revoking the railroad from utilizing an electronic or automated tracking system.

[70 FR 11095, Mar. 7, 2005]

Subpart B—Automatic Block Signal Systems

Standards

§ 236.201 Track-circuit control of signals.

The control circuits for home signal aspects with indications more favorable than “proceed at restricted speed” shall be controlled automatically by track circuits extending through the entire block.

§ 236.202 Signal governing movements over hand-operated switch.

Signal governing movements over hand-operated switch in the facing direction shall display its most restrictive aspect when the points are open one-fourth inch or more and, in the trailing direction, three-eighths inch or more, except that where a separate aspect is displayed for facing movements over the switch in the normal and in the reverse position, the signal shall display its most restrictive aspect when the switch points are open one-fourth inch or more from either the normal or reverse position.

§ 236.203 Hand operated crossover between main tracks; protection.

At hand-operated crossover between main tracks, protection shall be provided by one of the following:

(a) An arrangement of one or more track circuits and switch circuit controllers,

(b) Facing point locks on both switches of the crossover, with both locks operated by a single lever, or

(c) Electric locking of the switches of the crossover. Signals governing movements over either switch shall display their most restrictive aspect when any of the following conditions exist:

(1) Where protection is provided by one or more track circuits and switch circuit controllers, and either switch is open or the crossover is occupied by a train, locomotive or car in such a manner as to foul the main track. It shall not be a violation of this requirement where the presence of sand, rust, dirt, grease or other foreign matter on the rail prevents effective shunting;

(2) Where facing point locks with a single lever are provided, and either switch is unlocked;

(3) Where the switches are electrically locked, before the electric locking releases.

§ 236.204 Track signaled for movements in both directions, requirements.

On track signaled for movements in both directions, a train shall cause one or more opposing signals immediately ahead of it to display the most restrictive aspect, the indication of which shall be not more favorable than “proceed at restricted speed.” Signals shall be so arranged and controlled that if opposing trains can simultaneously pass signals displaying proceed aspects and the next signal in advance of each such signal then displays an aspect requiring a stop, or its most restrictive aspect, the distance between opposing signals displaying such aspects shall be not less than the aggregate of the stopping distances for movements in each direction. Where such opposing signals are spaced stopping distance apart for movements in one direction only, signals arranged to display restrictive aspects shall be provided in approach to at least one of the signals. Where such opposing signals are spaced less than stopping distance apart for movements in one direction, signals arranged to display restrictive aspects shall be provided in approach to both such signals. In absolute permissive block signaling, when a train passes a head block signal, it shall cause the opposing head block signal to display an aspect with an indication not more favorable than “stop.”

[33 FR 19684, Dec. 25, 1968, as amended at 49 FR 3384, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.205 Signal control circuits; requirements.

The circuits shall be so installed that each signal governing train movements into a block will display its most restrictive aspect when any of the following conditions obtain within the block:

(a) Occupancy by a train, locomotive, or car,

(b) When points of a switch are not closed in proper position,

(c) When an independently operated fouling point derail equipped with switch circuit controller is not in derailing position,

(d) When a track relay is in de-energized position or a device which functions as a track relay is in its most restrictive state; or when signal control circuit is deenergized.

[33 FR 19684, Dec. 25, 1968, as amended at 49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.206 Battery or power supply with respect to relay; location.

The battery or power supply for each signal control relay circuit, where an open-wire circuit or a common return circuit is used, shall be located at the end of the circuit farthest from the relay.

§ 236.207 Electric lock on hand-operated switch; control.

Electric lock on hand-operated switch shall be controlled so that it cannot be unlocked until control circuits of signals governing movements over such switch have been opened. Approach or time locking shall be provided.

[49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

Subpart C—Interlocking

Standards

§ 236.301 Where signals shall be provided.

Signals shall be provided to govern train movements into and through interlocking limits, except that a signal shall not be required to govern movements over a hand-operated switch into interlocking limits if the switch is provided with an electric lock and a derail at the clearance point, either pipe-connected to the switch or independently locked, electrically. Electric locks installed under this rule must conform to the time and approach locking requirements of Rule 314 (without reference to the 20-mile exceptions), and those of either Rule 760 or Rule 768, as may be appropriate.

§ 236.302 Track circuits and route locking.

Track circuits and route locking shall be provided and shall be effective when the first pair of wheels of a locomotive or a car passes a point not more than 13 feet in advance of the signal governing its movement, measured from the center of the mast, or if there is no mast, from the center of the signal.

[49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.303 Control circuits for signals, selection through circuit controller operated by switch points or by switch locking mechanism.

The control circuit for each aspect with indication more favorable than “proceed at restricted speed” of power operated signal governing movements over switches, movable-point frogs and derails shall be selected through circuit controller operated directly by switch points or by switch locking mechanism, or through relay controlled by such circuit controller, for each switch, movable-point frog, and derail in the routes governed by such signal. Circuits shall be arranged so that such signal can display an aspect more favorable than “proceed at restricted speed,” only when each switch, movable-point frog, and derail in the route is in proper position.

§ 236.304 Mechanical locking or same protection effected by circuits.

Mechanical locking, or the same protection effected by means of circuits, shall be provided.

§ 236.305 Approach or time locking.

Approach or time locking shall be provided in connection with signals displaying aspects with indications more favorable than “proceed at restricted speed.”

§ 236.306 Facing point lock or switch-and-lock movement.

Facing point lock or switch-and-lock movement shall be provided for mechanically operated switch, movable-point frog, or split-point derail.

§ 236.307 Indication locking.

Indication locking shall be provided for operative approach signals of the semaphore type, power-operated home signals, power-operated switches, movable-point frogs and derails, and for all approach signals except light signals, all aspects of which are controlled by polar or coded track circuits or line circuits so arranged that a single fault will not permit a more favorable aspect than intended to be displayed.

[49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.308 Mechanical or electric locking or electric circuits; requisites.

Mechanical or electric locking or electric circuits shall be installed to prevent signals from displaying aspects which permit conflicting movements except that opposing signals may display an aspect indicating proceed at restricted speed at the same time on a track used for switching movements only, by one train at a time. Manual interlocking in service as of the date of this part at which opposing signals on the same track are permitted simultaneously to display aspects authorizing conflicting movements when interlocking is unattended, may be continued, provided that simultaneous train movements in opposite directions on the same track between stations on either side of the interlocking are not permitted.

Note:

Relief from the requirement of this section will be granted upon an adequate showing by an individual carrier to allow opposing signals on the same track simultaneously to display aspects to proceed through an interlocking which is unattended, provided that train movements in opposite directions on the same track between stations on either site of the interlocking are not permitted at the same time.

§ 236.309 Loss of shunt protection; where required.

(a) A loss of shunt of 5 seconds or less shall not permit an established route to be changed at an automatic interlocking.

(b) A loss of shunt of 5 seconds or less shall not permit the release of the route locking circuit of each power-operated switch hereafter installed.

[49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.310 Signal governing approach to home signal.

A signal shall be provided on main track to govern the approach with the current of traffic to any home signal except where the home signal is the first signal encountered when leaving yards or stations and authorized speed approaching such signal is not higher than slow speed. When authorized speed between home signals on route governed is 20 miles per hour or less, an inoperative signal displaying an aspect indicating “approach next signal prepared to stop” may be used to govern the approach to the home signal.

§ 236.311 Signal control circuits, selection through track relays or devices functioning as track relays and through signal mechanism contacts and time releases at automatic interlocking.

(a) The control circuits for aspects with indications more favorable than “proceed at restricted speed” shall be selected through track relays, or through devices that function as track relays, for all track circuits in the route governed.

(b) At automatic interlocking, signal control circuits shall be selected (1) through track relays, or devices that function as track relays, for all track circuits in the route governed and in all conflicting routes within the interlocking; (2) through signal mechanism contacts or relay contacts closed when signals for such conflicting routes display “stop” aspects; and (3) through normal contacts of time releases, time element relays, or timing devices for such conflicting routes, or contacts of relays repeating the normal position or normal state of such time releases, time element relays, or timing devices.

[49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.312 Movable bridge, interlocking of signal appliances with bridge devices.

When movable bridge is protected by interlocking the signal appliances shall be so interlocked with bridge devices that before a signal governing movements over the bridge can display an aspect to proceed the bridge must be locked and the track alined, with the bridge locking members within one inch of their proper positions and with the track rail on the movable span within three-eighths inch of correct surface and alinement with rail seating device on bridge abutment or fixed span. Emergency bypass switches and devices shall be locked or sealed.

[33 FR 19684, Dec. 25, 1968, as amended at 49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.313 [Reserved]

§ 236.314 Electric lock for hand-operated switch or derail.

Electric lock shall be provided for each hand-operated switch or derail within interlocking limits, except where train movements are made at not exceeding 20 miles per hour. At manually operated interlocking it shall be controlled by operator of the machine and shall be unlocked only after signals governing movements over such switch or derail display aspects indicating stop. Approach or time locking shall be provided.

Rules and Instructions

§ 236.326 Mechanical locking removed or disarranged; requirement for permitting train movements through interlocking.

When mechanical locking of interlocking machine is being changed or is removed from the machine, or locking becomes disarranged or broken, unless protection equivalent to mechanical locking is provided by electric locking or electric circuits, train movements through the interlocking shall not be permitted until each switch, movable-point frog or derail in the route is spiked, clamped or blocked in proper position so that it cannot be moved by its controlling lever, and then train movements shall not exceed restricted speed until the interlocking is restored to normal operation. It will not be necessary to comply with this requirement at interlockings where protection is in service in accordance with section 303, provided that the signal controls are arranged so that the signals cannot display an aspect the indication of which is less restrictive than “proceed at restricted speed.”

§ 236.327 Switch, movable-point frog or split-point derail.

Switch, movable-point frog, or split-point derail equipped with lock rod shall be maintained so that it can not be locked when the point is open three-eighths inch or more.

[49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.328 Plunger of facing-point lock.

Plunger of lever operated facing-point lock shall have at least 8-inch stroke. When lock lever is in unlocked position the end of the plunger shall clear the lock rod not more than one inch.

§ 236.329 Bolt lock.

Bolt lock shall be so maintained that signal governing movements over switch or derail and displaying an aspect indicating stop cannot be operated to display a less restrictive aspect while derail is in derailing position, or when switch point is open one-half inch or more.

§ 236.330 Locking dog of switch-and-lock movement.

Locking dog of switch-and-lock movement shall extend through lock rod one-half inch or more in either normal or reverse position.

§§ 236.331-236.333 [Reserved]

§ 236.334 Point detector.

Point detector shall be maintained so that when switch mechanism is locked in normal or reverse position, contacts cannot be opened by manually applying force at the closed switch point. Point detector circuit controller shall be maintained so that the contacts will not assume the position corresponding to switch point closure if the switch point is prevented by an obstruction, from closing to within one-fourth inch where latch-out device is not used, and to within three-eighths inch where latch-out device is used.

§ 236.335 Dogs, stops and trunnions of mechanical locking.

Driving pieces, dogs, stops and trunnions shall be rigidly secured to locking bars. Swing dogs shall have full and free movement. Top plates shall be maintained securely in place.

§ 236.336 Locking bed.

The various parts of the locking bed, locking bed supports, and tappet stop rail shall be rigidly secured in place and alined to permit free operation of locking.

§ 236.337 Locking faces of mechanical locking; fit.

Locking faces shall fit squarely against each other with a minimum engagement when locked of at least one-half the designed locking face.

§ 236.338 Mechanical locking required in accordance with locking sheet and dog chart.

Mechanical locking shall be in accordance with locking sheet and dog chart currently in effect.

§ 236.339 Mechanical locking, maintenance requirements.

Locking and connections shall be maintained so that, when a lever or latch is mechanically locked the following will be prevented:

(a) Mechanical machine —(1) Latch-operated locking.  Raising lever latch block so that bottom thereof is within three-eighths inch of top of quadrant.

(2) Lever-operated locking.  Moving lever latch block more than three-eighths inch on top of quadrant.

(b) Electromechanical machine —(1) Lever moving in horizontal plant.  Moving lever more than five-sixteenths inch when in normal position or more than nine-sixteenths inch when in reverse position.

(2) Lever moving in arc.  Moving lever more than 5 degrees.

(c) Power machine —(1) Latch-operated locking.  Raising lever latch block to that bottom thereof is within seven thirty-seconds inch of top of quadrant.

(2) Lever moving in horizontal plane.  Moving lever more than five-sixteenths inch when in normal position or more than nine-sixteenths inch when in reverse position.

(3) Lever moving in arc.  Moving lever more than 5 degrees.

§ 236.340 Electromechanical interlocking machine; locking between electrical and mechanical levers.

In electro-mechanical interlocking machine, locking between electric and mechanical levers shall be maintained so that mechanical lever cannot be operated except when released by electric lever.

§ 236.341 Latch shoes, rocker links, and quadrants.

Latch shoes, rocker links, and quadrants of Saxby and farmer machines shall be maintained so that locking will not release if a downward force not exceeding a man's weight is exerted on the rocker while the lever is in the mid-stroke position.

§ 236.342 Switch circuit controller.

Switch circuit controller connected at the point to switch, derail, or movable-point frog, shall be maintained so that its contacts will not be in position corresponding to switch point closure when switch point is open one-fourth inch or more.

Inspection and Tests

§ 236.376 Mechanical locking.

Mechanical locking in interlocking machine shall be tested when new locking is installed; and thereafter when change in locking is made, or locking becomes disarranged, or tested at least once every two years, whichever shall occur first.

[49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.377 Approach locking.

Approach locking shall be tested when placed in service and thereafter when modified, disarranged, or at least once every two years, whichever shall occur first.

[49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.378 Time locking.

Time locking shall be tested when placed in service and thereafter when modified, disarranged, or at least once every two years, whichever shall occur first.

[49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.379 Route locking.

Route locking or other type of switch locking shall be tested when placed in service and thereafter when modified, disarranged, or at least once every two years, whichever shall occur first.

[49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.380 Indication locking.

Indication locking shall be tested when placed in service and thereafter when modified, disarranged, or at least once every two years, whichever shall occur first.

[49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.381 Traffic locking.

Traffic locking shall be tested when placed in service and thereafter when modified, disarranged, or at least once every two years, whichever shall occur first.

[49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.382 Switch obstruction test.

Switch obstruction test of lock rod of each power-operated switch and lock rod of each hand-operated switch equipped with switch-and-lock-movement shall be made when lock rod is placed in service or changed out, but not less than once each month.

[49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.383 Valve locks, valves, and valve magnets.

Valve locks on valves of the non-cut-off type shall be tested at least once every three months, and valves and valve magnets shall be tested at least once every year.

[49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.384 Cross protection.

Cross protection shall be tested at least once every six months.

[49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.385 [Reserved]

§ 236.386 Restoring feature on power switches.

Restoring feature on power switches shall be tested at least once every three months.

§ 236.387 Movable bridge locking.

Movable bridge locking shall be tested at least once a year.

Subpart D—Traffic Control Systems

Standards

§ 236.401 Automatic block signal system and interlocking standards applicable to traffic control systems.

The standards prescribed in §§ 236.201, to 236.203, inclusive, §§ 236.205, 236.206, 236.303, 236.307 and 236.309 to 236.311, inclusive, shall apply to traffic control systems.

[49 FR 3385, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.402 Signals controlled by track circuits and control operator.

The control circuits for home signal aspects with indications more favorable than “proceed at restricted speed” shall be controlled by track circuits extending through entire block. Also in addition, at controlled point they may be controlled by control operator, and, at manually operated interlocking, they shall be controlled manually in cooperation with control operator.

§ 236.403 Signals at controlled point.

Signals at controlled point shall be so interconnected that aspects to proceed cannot be displayed simultaneously for conflicting movements, except that opposing signals may display an aspect indicating “proceed at restricted speed” at the same time on a track used for switching movements only, by one train at a time.

[49 FR 3386, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.404 Signals at adjacent control points.

Signals at adjacent controlled points shall be so interconnected that aspects to proceed on tracks signaled for movements at greater than restricted speed cannot be displayed simultaneously for conflicting movements.

§ 236.405 Track signaled for movements in both directions, change of direction of traffic.

On track signaled for movements in both directions, occupancy of the track between opposing signals at adjacent controlled points shall prevent changing the direction of traffic from that which obtained at the time the track became occupied, except that when a train having left one controlled point reaches a section of track immediately adjacent to the next controlled point at which switching is to be performed, an aspect permitting movement at not exceeding restricted speed may be displayed into the occupied block.

§ 236.406 [Reserved]

§ 236.407 Approach or time locking; where required.

Approach or time locking shall be provided for all controlled signals where route or direction of traffic can be changed.

[49 FR 3386, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.408 Route locking.

Route locking shall be provided where switches are power-operated. Route locking shall be effective when the first pair of wheels of a locomotive or car passes a point not more than 13 feet in advance of the signal governing its movement, measured from the center of the signal mast or, if there is no mast, from the center of the signal.

[49 FR 3386, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.409 [Reserved]

§ 236.410 Locking, hand-operated switch; requirements.

(a) Each hand-operated switch in main track shall be locked either electrically or mechanically in normal position, except:

(1) Where train speeds over the switch do not exceed 20 miles per hour;

(2) Where trains are not permitted to clear the main track;

(3) Where a signal is provided to govern train movements from the auxiliary track to the signaled track; or

(4) On a signaled siding without intermediate signals where the maximum authorized speed on the siding does not exceed 30 miles per hour.

(b) Approach or time locking shall be provided and locking may be released either automatically, or by the control operator, but only after the control circuits of signals governing movement in either direction over the switch and which display aspects with indications more favorable than “proceed at restricted speed” have been opened directly or by shunting of track circuit.

(c) Where a signal is used in lieu of electric or mechanical lock to govern movements from auxiliary track to signaled track, the signal shall not display an aspect to proceed until after the control circuits of signals governing movement on main track in either direction over the switch have been opened, and either the approach locking circuits to the switch are unoccupied or a predetermined time interval has expired.

Note:

Railroads shall bring all hand-operated switches that are not electrically or mechanically locked and that do not conform to the requirements of this section on the effective date of this part into conformity with this section in accordance with the following schedule:

Not less than 33% during calendar year 1984.

Not less than 66% during calendar year 1985.

The remainder during calendar year 1986.

[33 FR 19684, Dec. 25, 1968, as amended at 49 FR 3386, Jan. 26, 1984; 75 FR 2699, Jan. 15, 2010]

Rules and Instructions

§ 236.426 Interlocking rules and instructions applicable to traffic control systems.

The rules and instructions prescribed in §§ 236.327 and 236.328, § 236.330 to § 236.334, inclusive, and § 236.342 shall apply to traffic control systems.

Inspection and Tests

§ 236.476 Interlocking inspections and tests applicable to traffic control systems.

The inspections and tests prescribed in §§ 236.377 to 236.380, inclusive, and §§ 236.382, 236.383, and 236.386 shall apply to traffic control systems.

[49 FR 3386, Jan. 26, 1984]

Subpart E—Automatic Train Stop, Train Control and Cab Signal Systems

Standards

§ 236.501 Forestalling device and speed control.

(a) An automatic train stop system may include a device by means of which the automatic application of the brakes can be forestalled.

(b) Automatic train control system shall include one or more of the following features:

(1) Low-speed restriction, requiring the train to proceed under slow speed after it has either been stopped by an automatic application of the brakes, or under control of the engineman, its speed has been reduced to slow speed, until the apparatus is automatically restored to normal because the condition which caused the restriction no longer affects the movement of the train.

(2) Medium-speed restriction, requiring the train to proceed under medium speed after passing a signal displaying an approach aspect or when approaching a signal requiring a stop, or a stop indication point, in order to prevent an automatic application of the brakes.

Note:

Relief from the requirements of paragraphs (b) (1) and (2) of this section will be granted, insofar as speed limits fixed by definitions of Slow and Medium speeds are concerned, upon an adequate showing by an individual carrier where automatic train control systems now in service enforce speed restrictions higher than those required by definitions in §§ 236.700 to 236.838 inclusive.

(3) Maximum-speed restriction, effecting an automatic brake application whenever the predetermined maximum speed limit is exceeded.

§ 236.502 Automatic brake application, initiation by restrictive block conditions stopping distance in advance.

An automatic train-stop or train-control system shall operate to initiate an automatic brake application at least stopping distance from the entrance to a block, wherein any condition described in § 236.205 obtains, and at each main track signal requiring a reduction in speed.

§ 236.503 Automatic brake application; initiation when predetermined rate of speed exceeded.

An automatic train control system shall operate to initiate an automatic brake application when the speed of the train exceeds the predetermined rate as required by the setting of the speed control mechanism.

§ 236.504 Operation interconnected with automatic block-signal system.

(a) A continuous inductive automatic train stop or train control system shall operate in connection with an automatic block signal system and shall be so interconnected with the signal system as to perform its intended function in event of failure of the engineer to acknowledge or obey a restrictive wayside signal or a more restrictive cab signal.

(b) An intermittent inductive automatic train stop system shall operate in connection with an automatic block signal system and shall be so interconnected with the signal system that the failure of the engineer to acknowledge a restrictive wayside signal will cause the intermittent inductive automatic train stop system to perform its intended function.

[49 FR 3386, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.505 Proper operative relation between parts along roadway and parts on locomotive.

Proper operative relation between the parts along the roadway and the parts on the locomotive shall obtain under all conditions of speed, weather, wear, oscillation, and shock.

§ 236.506 Release of brakes after automatic application.

The automatic train stop or train control apparatus shall prevent release of the brakes after automatic application until a reset device has been operated, or the speed of the train has been reduced to a predetermined rate, or the condition that caused the brake application no longer affects the movement of the train. If reset device is used it shall be arranged so that the brakes cannot be released until the train has been stopped, or it shall be located so that it cannot be operated by engineman without leaving his accustomed position in the cab.

§ 236.507 Brake application; full service.

The automatic train stop or train control apparatus shall, when operated, cause a full service application of the brakes.

§ 236.508 Interference with application of brakes by means of brake valve.

The automatic train stop, train control, or cab signal apparatus shall be so arranged as not to interfere with the application of the brakes by means of the brake valve and not to impair the efficiency of the brake system.

[49 FR 3386, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.509 Two or more locomotives coupled.

The automatic train stop, train control or cab signal apparatus shall be arranged so that when two or more locomotives are coupled, or a pushing or helping locomotive is used, it can be made operative only on the locomotive from which the brakes are controlled.

§ 236.510 [Reserved]

§ 236.511 Cab signals controlled in accordance with block conditions stopping distance in advance.

The automatic cab signal system shall be arranged so that cab signals will be continuously controlled in accordance with conditions described in § 236.205 that obtain at least stopping distance in advance.

§ 236.512 Cab signal indication when locomotive enters block where restrictive conditions obtain.

The automatic cab signal system shall be arranged so that when a locomotive enters or is within a block, wherein any condition described in § 236.205 obtains, the cab signals shall indicate “Proceed at Restricted Speed.”

§ 236.513 Audible indicator.

(a) The automatic cab signal system shall be so arranged that when the cab signal changes to display a more restrictive aspect, an audible indicator will sound continuously until silenced by manual operation of an acknowledging device.

(b) The audible cab indicator of automatic cab signal, automatic train stop, or automatic train control system shall have a distinctive sound and be clearly audible throughout the cab under all operating conditions.

[49 FR 3386, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.514 Interconnection of cab signal system with roadway signal system.

The automatic cab signal system shall be interconnected with the roadway-signal system so that the cab signal indication will not authorize operation of the train at a speed higher than that authorized by the indication of the roadway signal that governed the movement of a train into a block except when conditions affecting movement of trains in the block change after the train passes the signal.

§ 236.515 Visibility of cab signals.

The cab signals shall be plainly visible to member or members of the locomotive crew from their stations in the cab.

[49 FR 3386, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.516 Power supply.

Automatic cab signal, train stop, or train control device hereafter installed shall operate from a separate or isolated power supply.

[49 FR 3386, Jan. 26, 1984]

Rules and Instructions; Roadway

§ 236.526 Roadway element not functioning properly.

When a roadway element except track circuit of automatic train stop, train control or cab signal system is not functioning as intended, the signal associated with such roadway element shall be caused manually to display its most restrictive aspect until such element has been restored to normal operative condition.

§ 236.527 Roadway element insulation resistance.

Insulation resistance between roadway inductor and ground shall be maintained at not less than 10,000 ohms.

[49 FR 3386, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.528 Restrictive condition resulting from open hand-operated switch; requirement.

When a facing point hand-operated switch is open one-fourth inch or more, a trailing point hand-operated switch three-eighths inch or more, or hand-operated switch is not locked where facing point lock with circuit controller is used, the resultant restrictive condition of an automatic train stop or train control device of the continuous type or the resultant restrictive cab signal indication of an automatic cab signal device on an approaching locomotive shall be maintained to within 300 feet of the points of the switch.

§ 236.529 Roadway element inductor; height and distance from rail.

Inductor of the inert roadway element type shall be maintained with the inductor pole faces at a height above the plane of the tops of the rails, and with its inner edge at a horizontal distance from the gage side of the nearest running rail, in accordance with specifications of the carrier.

[49 FR 3386, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.530 [Reserved]

§ 236.531 Trip arm; height and distance from rail.

Trip arm of automatic train stop device when in the stop position shall be maintained at a height above the plane of the tops of the rails, and at a horizontal distance from its center line to gage side of the nearest running rail, in accordance with specifications of the carrier.

[49 FR 3386, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.532 Strap iron inductor; use restricted.

No railroad shall use strap iron inductor or other roadway element with characteristics differing from its standard type on track where speed higher than restricted speed is permitted.

[49 FR 3386, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.533 [Reserved]

§ 236.534 Entrance to equipped territory; requirements.

Where trains are not required to stop at the entrance to equipped territory, except when leaving yards and stations and speed until entering equipped territory does not exceed restricted speed, the automatic train stop, train control, or cab signal device shall be operative at least stopping distance from the entrance to such territory except where the approach thereto is governed by automatic approach signal.

Rules and Instructions; Locomotives

§ 236.551 Power supply voltage; requirement.

The voltage of power supply shall be maintained within 10 percent of rated voltage.

§ 236.552 Insulation resistance; requirement.

When periodic test prescribed in § 236.588 is performed, insulation resistance between wiring and ground of continuous inductive automatic cab signal system, automatic train control system, or automatic train stop system shall be not less than one megohm, and that of an intermittent inductive automatic train stop system, not less than 250,000 ohms. Insulation resistance values between periodic tests shall be not less than 250,000 ohms for a continuous inductive automatic cab signal system, automatic train control system, or automatic train stop system, and 20,000 ohms for an intermittent inductive automatic train stop system.

[49 FR 3387, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.553 Seal, where required.

Seal shall be maintained on any device other than brake-pipe cut-out cock (double-heading cock), by means of which the operation of the pneumatic portion of automatic train-stop or train-control apparatus can be cut out.

§ 236.554 Rate of pressure reduction; equalizing reservoir or brake pipe.

The equalizing-reservoir pressure or brake-pipe pressure reduction during an automatic brake application shall be at a rate not less than that which results from a manual service application.

§ 236.555 Repaired or rewound receiver coil.

Receiver coil which has been repaired or rewound shall have the same operating characteristics which it possessed originally or as currently specified for new equipment.

§ 236.556 Adjustment of relay.

Change in adjustment of relay shall be made only in a shop equipped for that purpose except when receiver coils, electro-pneumatic valve, or other essential part of the equipment is replaced. Irregularities in power-supply voltage or other variable factors in the circuit shall not be compensated for by adjustment of the relay.

§ 236.557 Receiver; location with respect to rail.

(a) Receiver of intermittent inductive automatic train stop device of the inert roadway element type shall be maintained with bottom of the receiver at a height above the plane of the tops of the rails, and with its outer edge at a horizontal distance from the gage side of the nearest rail, in accordance with specifications of the carrier.

(b) Receiver of continuous inductive automatic cab signal, train stop, or train control device of locomotive equipped with onboard test equipment, shall be maintained with the bottom of the receiver at a height above the plane of the tops of the rails, and with its outer edge at a horizontal distance from the gage side of the nearest rail, in accordance with specifications of the carrier.

[49 FR 3387, Jan. 26, 1984]

§§ 236.558-236.559 [Reserved]

§ 236.560 Contact element, mechanical trip type; location with respect to rail.

Contact element of automatic train stop device of the mechanical trip type shall be maintained at a height above the plane of the tops of the rails, and at a horizontal distance from the gage side of the rail, in accordance with specifications of the carrier.

[49 FR 3387, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.561 [Reserved]

§ 236.562 Minimum rail current required.

The minimum rail current required to restore the locomotive equipment of continuous inductive automatic train stop or train control device to normal condition or to obtain a proceed indication of automatic cab signal device (pick-up) shall be in accordance with specifications of the carrier.

[49 FR 3387, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.563 Delay time.

Delay time of automatic train stop or train control system shall not exceed 8 seconds and the spacing of signals to meet the requirements of § 236.24 shall take into consideration the delay time.

§ 236.564 Acknowledging time.

Acknowledging time of intermittent automatic train-stop device shall be not more than 30 seconds.

§ 236.565 Provision made for preventing operation of pneumatic brake-applying apparatus by double-heading cock; requirement.

Where provision is made for preventing the operation of the pneumatic brake-applying apparatus of an automatic train stop or train control device when the double-heading cock is placed in double-heading position, the automatic train stop or train control device shall not be cut out before communication is closed between the engineman's automatic brake valve and the brake pipe, when operating double-heading cock toward double-heading position.

§ 236.566 Locomotive of each train operating in train stop, train control or cab signal territory; equipped.

The locomotive from which brakes are controlled, of each train operating in automatic train stop, train control, or cab signal territory shall be equipped with apparatus responsive to the roadway equipment installed on all or any part of the route traversed, and such apparatus shall be in operative condition.

§ 236.567 Restrictions imposed when device fails and/or is cut out en route.

(a) Except as provided in subparts H or I of this part, where an automatic train stop, train control, or cab signal device fails and/or is cut out en route, the train on which the device is inoperative may proceed to the next available point of communication where report must be made to a designated officer, at speeds not to exceed the following:

(1) If no block signal system is in operation, restricted speed; or

(2) If a block signal system is in operation, according to signal indication but not to exceed 40 miles per hour.

(b) Upon completion and communication of the report required by paragraph (a) of this section, a train may continue to a point where an absolute block can be established in advance of the train at speeds not to exceed the following:

(1) If no block signal system is in operation, restricted speed; or

(2) If a block signal system is in operation, according to signal indication but not to exceed 40 miles per hour.

(c) Upon reaching the location where an absolute block has been established in advance of the train, as referenced in paragraph (b) of this section, the train may proceed at speeds not to exceed the following:

(1) If no block signal system is in operation and the train is a passenger train, 59 miles per hour;

(2) If no block signal system is in operation and the train is a freight train, 49 miles per hour; and

(3) If a block signal system is in operation, 79 miles per hour.

[79 FR 49715, Aug. 22, 2014]

§ 236.568 Difference between speeds authorized by roadway signal and cab signal; action required.

If for any reason a cab signal authorizes a speed different from that authorized by a roadway signal, when a train enters the block governed by such roadway signal, the lower speed shall not be exceeded.

Inspection and Tests; Roadway

§ 236.576 Roadway element.

Roadway elements, except track circuits, including those for test purposes, shall be gaged monthly for height and alinement, and shall be tested at least every 6 months.

§ 236.577 Test, acknowledgement, and cut-in circuits.

Test, acknowledgement, and cut-in circuits shall be tested at least once every twelve months.

[49 FR 3387, Jan. 26, 1984]

Inspection and Tests; Locomotive

§ 236.586 Daily or after trip test.

(a) Except where tests prescribed by § 236.588 are performed at intervals of not more than 2 months, each locomotive equipped with an automatic cab signal or train stop or train control device operating in equipped territory shall be inspected for damage to the equipment and tested at least once each calendar day or within 24 hours before departure upon each trip.

(b) Each equipped locomotive shall be tested to determine the locomotive equipment is responsive to the wayside equipment and shall be cycled to determine the device functions as intended.

(c) Each locomotive equipped with intermittent inductive automatic train stop or non-coded continuous inductive automatic train stop or non-coded continuous inductive automatic train control device shall be tested to determine that the pickup of the device is within specified limits.

[49 FR 3387, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.587 Departure test.

(a) The automatic train stop, train control, or cab signal apparatus on each locomotive, except a locomotive or a multiple-unit car equipped with mechanical trip stop, shall be tested using one of the following methods:

(1) Operation over track elements;

(2) Operation over test circuit;

(3) Use of portable test equipment; or

(4) Use of onboard test device.

(b) The test shall be made on departure of the locomotive from its initial terminal unless that apparatus will be cut out between the initial terminal and the equipped territory. If the apparatus is cut out between the initial terminal and the equipped territory the test shall be made prior to entering equipped territory.

(c) If a locomotive makes more than one trip in any 24-hour period, only one departure test is required in such 24-hour period.

(d) (1) Whoever performs the test shall certify in writing that such test was properly performed. The certification and the test results shall be posted in the cab of the locomotive and a copy of the certification and test results left at the test location for filing in the office of the supervisory official having jurisdiction.

(2) If it is impractical to leave a copy of the certification and test results at the location of the test, the test results shall be transmitted to either (i) the dispatcher or (ii) one other designated individual at each location, who shall keep a written record of the test results and the name of the person performing the test. These records shall be retained for at least 92 days.

[49 FR 3387, Jan. 26, 1984, as amended at 53 FR 37313, Sept. 26, 1988]

Effective Date Note

Effective Date Note:

At 49 FR 3387, Jan. 26, 1984, § 236.587 was revised. This section contains information collection and recordkeeping requirements and will not become effective until approval has been given by the Office of Management and Budget.

§ 236.588 Periodic test.

Except as provided in § 236.586, periodic test of the automatic train stop, train control, or cab signal apparatus shall be made at least once every 92 days, and on multiple-unit cars as specified by the carrier, subject to approval by the FRA.

[49 FR 3387, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.589 Relays.

(a) Each relay shall be removed from service, subjected to thorough test, necessary repairs and adjustments made, and shall not be replaced in service unless its operating characteristics are in accordance with the limits within which such relay is designed to operate, as follows:

(1) Master or primary relays of torque type depending on spring tension to return contacts to deenergized position in noncoded continuous inductive automatic train stop or train control system, at least once every two years; and

(2) All other relays, at least once every six years.

(b) [Reserved]

[49 FR 3387, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.590 Pneumatic apparatus.

Automatic train stop, train control, or cab signal pneumatic apparatus shall be inspected, cleaned, and the results of such inspection recorded as provided by § 229.29(a). When a locomotive with automatic train stop, train control, or cab signal pneumatic apparatus receives out-of-use credit pursuant to § 229.33, the automatic train stop, train control, or cab signal apparatus shall be tested in accordance with § 236.588 prior to the locomotive being placed in service.

[61 FR 33873, July 1, 1996]

Subpart F—Dragging Equipment and Slide Detectors and Other Similar Protective Devices

Standards

§ 236.601 Signals controlled by devices; location.

Signals controlled by devices used to provide protection against unusual contingencies, such as landslides, dragging equipment, burned bridges or trestles and washouts shall be located so that stopping distance will be provided between the signal and the point where it is necessary to stop the train.

Subpart G—Definitions

§ 236.700 Definitions.

For the purpose of these rules, standards, and instructions, the following definitions will apply.

§ 236.701 Application, brake; full service.

An application of the brakes resulting from a continuous or a split reduction in brake pipe pressure at a service rate until maximum brake cylinder pressure is developed. As applied to an automatic or electro-pneumatic brake with speed governor control, an application other than emergency which develops the maximum brake cylinder pressure, as determined by the design of the brake equipment for the speed at which the train is operating.

§ 236.702 Arm, semaphore.

The part of a semaphore signal displaying an aspect. It consists of a blade fastened to a spectacle.

§ 236.703 Aspect.

The appearance of a roadway signal conveying an indication as viewed from the direction of an approaching train; the appearance of a cab signal conveying an indication as viewed by an observer in the cab.

§ 236.704 [Reserved]

§ 236.705 Bar, locking.

A bar in an interlocking machine to which the locking dogs are attached.

§ 236.706 Bed, locking.

That part of an interlocking machine that contains or holds the tappets, locking bars, crosslocking, dogs and other apparatus used to interlock the levers.

§ 236.707 Blade, semaphore.

The extended part of a semaphore arm which shows the position of the arm.

§ 236.708 Block.

A length of track of defined limits, the use of which by trains is governed by block signals, cab signals, or both.

§ 236.709 Block, absolute.

A block in which no train is permitted to enter while it is occupied by another train.

§ 236.710 Block, latch.

The lower extremity of a latch rod which engages with a square shoulder of the segment or quadrant to hold the lever in position.

§ 236.711 Bond, rail joint.

A metallic connection attached to adjoining rails to insure electrical conductivity.

§ 236.712 Brake pipe.

A pipe running from the engineman's brake valve through the train, used for the transmission of air under pressure to charge and actuate the automatic brake equipment and charge the reservoirs of the electro-pneumatic brake equipment on each vehicle of the train.

§ 236.713 Bridge, movable.

That section of a structure bridging a navigable waterway so designed that it may be displaced to permit passage of traffic on the waterway.

§ 236.714 Cab.

The compartment of a locomotive from which the propelling power and power brakes of the train are manually controlled.

§§ 236.715-236.716 [Reserved]

§ 236.717 Characteristics, operating.

The measure of electrical values at which electrical or electronic apparatus operate (e.g., drop-away, pick-up, maximum and minimum current, and working value).

[49 FR 3387, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.718 Chart, dog.

A diagrammatic representation of the mechanical locking of an interlocking machine, used as a working plan in making up, assembling and fitting the locking.

§ 236.719 Circuit, acknowledgment.

A circuit consisting of wire or other conducting material installed between the track rails at each signal in territory where an automatic train stop system or cab signal system of the continuous inductive type with 2-indication cab signals is in service, to enforce acknowledgement by the engineman at each signal displaying an aspect requiring a stop.

§ 236.720 Circuit, common return.

A term applied where one wire is used for the return of more than one electric circuit.

§ 236.721 Circuit, control.

An electrical circuit between a source of electric energy and a device which it operates.

§ 236.722 Circuit, cut-in.

A roadway circuit at the entrance to automatic train stop, train control or cab signal territory by means of which locomotive equipment of the continuous inductive type is actuated so as to be in operative condition.

§ 236.723 Circuit, double wire; line.

An electric circuit not employing a common return wire; a circuit formed by individual wires throughout.

§ 236.724 Circuit, shunt fouling.

The track circuit in the fouling section of a turnout, connected in multiple with the track circuit in the main track.

§ 236.725 Circuit, switch shunting.

A shunting circuit which is closed through contacts of a switch circuit controller.

§ 236.726 Circuit, track.

An electrical circuit of which the rails of the track form a part.

§ 236.727 Circuit, track; coded.

A track circuit in which the energy is varied or interrupted periodically.

§ 236.728 Circuit, trap.

A term applied to a circuit used where it is desirable to provide a track circuit but where it is impracticable to maintain a track circuit.

§ 236.729 Cock, double heading.

A manually operated valve by means of which the control of brake operation is transferred to the leading locomotive.

§ 236.730 Coil, receiver.

Concentric layers of insulated wire wound around the core of a receiver of an automatic train stop, train control or cab signal device on a locomotive.

§ 236.731 Controller, circuit.

A device for opening and closing electric circuits.

§ 236.732 Controller, circuit; switch.

A device for opening and closing electric circuits, operated by a rod connected to a switch, derail or movable-point frog.

§ 236.733 Current, foreign.

A term applied to stray electric currents which may affect a signaling system, but which are not a part of the system.

§ 236.734 Current of traffic.

The movement of trains on a specified track in a designated direction.

§ 236.735 Current, leakage.

A stray electric current of relatively small value which flows through or across the surface of insulation when a voltage is impressed across the insulation.

§ 236.736 Cut-section.

A location other than a signal location where two adjoining track circuits end within a block.

§ 236.737 Cut-section, relayed.

A cut-section where the energy for one track circuit is supplied through front contacts or through front and polar contacts of the track relay for the adjoining track circuit.

§ 236.738 Detector, point.

A circuit controller which is part of the switch operating mechanism and operated by a rod connected to a switch, derail or movable point frog to indicate that the point is within a specified distance of the stock rail.

§ 236.739 Device, acknowledging.

A manually operated electric switch or pneumatic valve by means of which, on a locomotive equipped with an automatic train stop or train control device, an automatic brake application can be forestalled, or by means of which, on a locomotive equipped with an automatic cab signal device, the sounding of the cab indicator can be silenced.

§ 236.740 Device, reset.

A device whereby the brakes may be released after an automatic train control brake application.

§ 236.741 Distance, stopping.

The maximum distance on any portion of any railroad which any train operating on such portion of railroad at its maximum authorized speed, will travel during a full service application of the brakes, between the point where such application is initiated and the point where the train comes to a stop.

§ 236.742 Dog, locking.

A steel block attached to a locking bar or tappet of an interlocking machine, by means of which locking between levers is accomplished.

§ 236.743 Dog, swing.

A locking dog mounted in such a manner that it is free to rotate on a trunnion which is riveted to a locking bar.

Cross Reference:

Element, contact. See receiver, § 236.788.

§ 236.744 Element, roadway.

That portion of the roadway apparatus of automatic train stop, train control, or cab signal system, such as electric circuit, inductor, or trip arm to which the locomotive apparatus of such system is directly responsive.

[49 FR 3387, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.745 Face, locking.

The locking surface of a locking dog, tappet or cross locking of an interlocking machine.

§ 236.746 Feature, restoring.

An arrangement on an electro-pneumatic switch by means of which power is applied to restore the switch movement to full normal or to full reverse position, before the driving bar creeps sufficiently to unlock the switch, with control level in normal or reverse position.

[49 FR 3388, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.747 Forestall.

As applied to an automatic train stop or train control device, to prevent an automatic brake application by operation of an acknowledging device or by manual control of the speed of the train.

§ 236.748 [Reserved]

§ 236.749 Indication.

The information conveyed by the aspect of a signal.

Cross Reference:

Inductor, see § 236.744.

§ 236.750 Interlocking, automatic.

An arrangement of signals, with or without other signal appliances, which functions through the exercise of inherent powers as distinguished from those whose functions are controlled manually, and which are so interconnected by means of electric circuits that their movements must succeed each other in proper sequence, train movements over all routes being governed by signal indication.

§ 236.751 Interlocking, manual.

An arrangement of signals and signal appliances operated from an interlocking machine and so interconnected by means of mechanical and/or electric locking that their movements must succeed each other in proper sequence, train movements over all routes being governed by signal indication.

§ 236.752 Joint, rail, insulated.

A joint in which electrical insulation is provided between adjoining rails.

§ 236.753 Limits, interlocking.

The tracks between the opposing home signals of an interlocking.

§ 236.754 Line, open wire.

An overhead wire line consisting of single conductors as opposed to multiple-conductor cables.

§ 236.755 Link, rocker.

That portion of an interlocking machine which transmits motion between the latch and the universal link.

§ 236.756 Lock, bolt.

A mechanical lock so arranged that if a switch, derail or movable-point frog is not in the proper position for a train movement, the signal governing that movement cannot display an aspect to proceed; and that will prevent a movement of the switch, derail or movable-point frog unless the signal displays its most restrictive aspect.

§ 236.757 Lock, electric.

A device to prevent or restrict the movement of a lever, a switch or a movable bridge, unless the locking member is withdrawn by an electrical device, such as an electromagnet, solenoid or motor.

§ 236.758 Lock, electric, forced drop.

An electric lock in which the locking member is mechanically forced down to the locked position.

§ 236.759 Lock, facing point.

A mechanical lock for a switch, derail, or movable-point frog, comprising a plunger stand and a plunger which engages a lock rod attached to the switch point to lock the operated unit.

§ 236.760 Locking, approach.

Electric locking effective while a train is approaching, within a specified distance, a signal displaying an aspect to proceed, and which prevents, until after the expiration of a predetermined time interval after such signal has been caused to display its most restrictive aspect, the movement of any interlocked or electrically locked switch, movable-point frog, or derail in the route governed by the signal, and which prevents an aspect to proceed from being displayed for any conflicting route.

§ 236.761 Locking, electric.

The combination of one or more electric locks and controlling circuits by means of which levers of an interlocking machine, or switches or other units operated in connection with signaling and interlocking, are secured against operation under certain conditions.

§ 236.762 Locking, indication.

Electric locking which prevents manipulation of levers that would result in an unsafe condition for a train movement if a signal, switch, or other operative unit fails to make a movement corresponding to that of its controlling lever, or which directly prevents the operation of a signal, switch, or other operative unit, in case another unit which should operate first fails to make the required movement.

§ 236.763 Locking, latch operated.

The mechanical locking of an interlocking machine which is actuated by means of the lever latch.

§ 236.764 Locking, lever operated.

The mechanical locking of an interlocking machine which is actuated by means of the lever.

§ 236.765 Locking, mechanical.

An arrangement of locking bars, dogs, tappets, cross locking and other apparatus by means of which interlocking is effected between the levers of an interlocking machine and so interconnected that their movements must succeed each other in a predetermined order.

§ 236.766 Locking, movable bridge.

The rail locks, bridge locks, bolt locks, circuit controllers, and electric locks used in providing interlocking protection at a movable bridge.

§ 236.767 Locking, route.

Electric locking, effective when a train passes a signal displaying an aspect for it to proceed, which prevents the movement of any switch, movable-point frog, or derail in advance of the train within the route entered. It may be so arranged that as a train clears a track section of the route, the locking affecting that section is released.

§ 236.768 Locking, time.

A method of locking, either mechanical or electrical, which, after a signal has been caused to display an aspect to proceed, prevents, until after the expiration of a predetermined time interval after such signal has been caused to display its most restrictive aspect, the operation of any interlocked or electrically locked switch, movable-point frog, or derail in the route governed by that signal, and which prevents an aspect to proceed from being displayed for any conflicting route.

§ 236.769 Locking, traffic.

Electric locking which prevents the manipulation of levers or other devices for changing the direction of traffic on a section of track while that section is occupied or while a signal displays an aspect for a movement to proceed into that section.

§ 236.770 Locomotive.

A self-propelled unit of equipment which can be used in train service.

§ 236.771 Machine, control.

An assemblage of manually operated devices for controlling the functions of a traffic control system; it may include a track diagram with indication lights.

§ 236.772 Machine, interlocking.

An assemblage of manually operated levers or other devices for the control of signals, switches or other units.

Cross Reference:

Magnet, track, see § 236.744.

§ 236.773 Movements, conflicting.

Movements over conflicting routes.

§ 236.774 Movement, facing.

The movement of a train over the points of a switch which face in a direction opposite to that in which the train is moving.

§ 236.775 Movement, switch-and-lock.

A device, the complete operation of which performs the three functions of unlocking, operating and locking a switch, movable-point frog or derail.

§ 236.776 Movement, trailing.

The movement of a train over the points of a switch which face in the direction in which the train is moving.

§ 236.777 Operator, control.

An employee assigned to operate the control machine of a traffic control system.

§ 236.778 Piece, driving.

A crank secured to a locking shaft by means of which horizontal movement is imparted to a longitudinal locking bar.

§ 236.779 Plate, top.

A metal plate secured to a locking bracket to prevent the cross locking from being forced out of the bracket.

§ 236.780 Plunger, facing point lock.

That part of a facing point lock which secures the lock rod to the plunger stand when the switch is locked.

§ 236.781 [Reserved]

§ 236.782 Point, controlled.

A location where signals and/or other functions of a traffic control system are controlled from the control machine.

§ 236.783 Point, stop-indication.

As applied to an automatic train stop or train control system without the use of roadway signals, a point where a signal displaying an aspect requiring a stop would be located.

§ 236.784 Position, deenergized.

The position assumed by the moving member of an electromagnetic device when the device is deprived of its operating current.

§ 236.785 Position, false restrictive.

A position of a semaphore arm that is more restrictive than it should be.

§ 236.786 Principle, closed circuit.

The principle of circuit design where a normally energized electric circuit which, on being interrupted or deenergized, will cause the controlled function to assume its most restrictive condition.

§ 236.787 Protection, cross.

An arrangement to prevent the improper operation of a signal, switch, movable-point frog, or derail as the result of a cross in electrical circuits.

Cross Reference:

Ramp, see § 236.744.

§ 236.787a Railroad.

Railroad means any form of non-highway ground transportation that runs on rails or electromagnetic guideways and any entity providing such transportation, including—

(a) Commuter or other short-haul railroad passenger service in a metropolitan or suburban area and commuter railroad service that was operated by the Consolidated Rail Corporation on January 1, 1979; and

(b) High speed ground transportation systems that connect metropolitan areas, without regard to whether those systems use new technologies not associated with traditional railroads; but does not include rapid transit operations in an urban area that are not connected to the general railroad system of transportation.

[70 FR 11095, Mar. 7, 2005]

§ 236.788 Receiver.

A device on a locomotive, so placed that it is in position to be influenced inductively or actuated by an automatic train stop, train control or cab signal roadway element.

§ 236.789 Relay, timing.

A relay which will not close its front contacts or open its back contacts, or both, until the expiration of a definite time intervals after the relay has been energized.

§ 236.790 Release, time.

A device used to prevent the operation of an operative unit until after the expiration of a predetermined time interval after the device has been actuated.

§ 236.791 Release, value.

The electrical value at which the movable member of an electromagnetic device will move to its deenergized portion.

§ 236.792 Reservoir, equalizing.

An air reservoir connected with and adding volume to the top portion of the equalizing piston chamber of the automatic brake valve, to provide uniform service reductions in brake pipe pressure regardless of the length of the train.

Cross Reference:

Rocker, see § 236.755.

§ 236.793 Rod, lock.

A rod, attached to the front rod or lug of a switch, movable-point frog or derail, through which a locking plunger may extend when the switch points or derail are in the normal or reverse position.

§ 236.794 Rod, up-and-down.

A rod used for connecting the semaphore arm to the operating mechanism of a signal.

§ 236.795 Route.

The course or way which is, or is to be, traveled.

§ 236.796 Routes, conflicting.

Two or more routes, opposing, converging or intersecting, over which movements cannot be made simultaneously without possibility of collision.

§ 236.797 Route, interlocked.

A route within interlocking limits.

§ 236.798 Section, dead.

A section of track, either within a track circuit or between two track circuits, the rails of which are not part of a track circuit.

§ 236.799 Section, fouling.

The section of track between the switch points and the clearance point in a turnout.

§ 236.800 Sheet, locking.

A description in tabular form of the locking operations in an interlocking machine.

§ 236.801 Shoe, latch.

The casting by means of which the latch rod and the latch block are held to a lever of a mechanical interlocking machine.

§ 236.802 Shunt.

A by-path in an electrical circuit.

§ 236.802a Siding.

An auxiliary track for meeting or passing trains.

§ 236.803 Signal, approach.

A roadway signal used to govern the approach to another signal and if operative so controlled that its indication furnishes advance information of the indication of the next signal.

§ 236.804 Signal, block.

A roadway signal operated either automatically or manually at the entrance to a block.

§ 236.805 Signal, cab.

A signal located in engineman's compartment or cab, indicating a condition affecting the movement of a train and used in conjunction with interlocking signals and in conjunction with or in lieu of block signals.

§ 236.806 Signal, home.

A roadway signal at the entrance to a route or block to govern trains in entering and using that route or block.

§ 236.807 Signal, interlocking.

A roadway signal which governs movements into or within interlocking limits.

§ 236.808 Signals, opposing.

Roadway signals which govern movements in opposite directions on the same track.

§ 236.809 Signal, slotted mechanical.

A mechanically operated signal with an electromagnetic device inserted in its operating connection to provide a means of controlling the signal electrically, as well as mechanically.

§ 236.810 Spectacle, semaphore arm.

That part of a semaphore arm which holds the roundels and to which the blade is fastened.

§ 236.811 Speed, medium.

A speed not exceeding 40 miles per hour.

§ 236.812 Speed, restricted.

A speed that will permit stopping within one-half the range of vision, but not exceeding 20 miles per hour.

[49 FR 3388, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.813 Speed, slow.

A speed not exceeding 20 miles per hour.

§ 236.813a State, most restrictive.

The mode of an electric or electronic device that is equivalent to a track relay in its deenergized position.

[49 FR 3388, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.814 Station, control.

The place where the control machine of a traffic control system is located.

§ 236.815 Stop.

As applied to mechanical locking, a device secured to a locking bar to limit its movement.

§ 236.816 Superiority of trains.

The precedence conferred upon one train over other trains by train order or by reason of its class or the direction of its movement.

§ 236.817 Switch, electro-pneumatic.

A switch operated by an electro-pneumatic switch-and-lock movement.

§ 236.818 Switch, facing point.

A switch, the points of which face traffic approaching in the direction for which the track is signaled.

§ 236.819 Switch, hand operated.

A non-interlocked switch which can only be operated manually.

§ 236.820 Switch, interlocked.

A switch within the interlocking limits the control of which is interlocked with other functions of the interlocking.

§ 236.820a Switch, power-operated.

A switch operated by an electrically, hydraulically, or pneumatically driven switch-and-lock movement.

[49 FR 3388, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.821 Switch, sectionalizing.

A switch for disconnecting a section of a power line from the source of energy.

§ 236.822 Switch, spring.

A switch equipped with a spring device which forces the points to their original position after being trailed through and holds them under spring compression.

§ 236.823 Switch, trailing point.

A switch, the points of which face away from traffic approaching in the direction for which the track is signaled.

§ 236.824 System, automatic block signal.

A block signal system wherein the use of each block is governed by an automatic block signal, cab signal, or both.

§ 236.825 System, automatic train control.

A system so arranged that its operation will automatically result in the following:

(a) A full service application of the brakes which will continue either until the train is brought to a stop, or, under control of the engineman, its speed is reduced to a predetermined rate.

(b) When operating under a speed restriction, an application of the brakes when the speed of the train exceeds the predetermined rate and which will continue until the speed is reduced to that rate.

§ 236.826 System, automatic train stop.

A system so arranged that its operation will automatically result in the application of the brakes until the train has been brought to a stop.

§ 236.827 System, block signal.

A method of governing the movement of trains into or within one or more blocks by block signals or cab signals.

§ 236.828 System, traffic control.

A block signal system under which train movements are authorized by block signals whose indications supersede the superiority of trains for both opposing and following movements on the same track.

§ 236.829 Terminal, initial.

The starting point of a locomotive for a trip.

§ 236.830 Time, acknowledging.

As applied to an intermittent automatic train stop system, a predetermined time within which an automatic brake application may be forestalled by means of the acknowledging device.

§ 236.831 Time, delay.

As applied to an automatic train stop or train control system, the time which elapses after the onboard apparatus detects a more restrictive indication until the brakes start to apply.

[49 FR 3388, Jan. 26, 1984]

§ 236.831a Track, main.

A track, other than auxiliary track, extending through yards and between stations, upon which trains are operated by timetable or train orders, or both, or the use of which is governed by block signals.

§ 236.832 Train.

A locomotive or more than one locomotive coupled, with or without cars.

§ 236.833 Train, opposing.

A train, the movement of which is in a direction opposite to and toward another train on the same track.

§ 236.834 Trip.

A movement of a locomotive over all or any portion of automatic train stop, train control or cab signal territory between the terminals for that locomotive; a movement in one direction.

Cross Reference:

Trip-arm, see § 236.744.

§ 236.835 Trunking.

A casing used to protect electrical conductors.

§ 236.836 Trunnion.

A cylindrical projection supporting a revolving part.

§ 236.837 Valve, electro-pneumatic.

A valve electrically operated which, when operated, will permit or prevent passage of air.

§ 236.838 Wire, shunt.

A wire forming part of a shunt circuit.

Subpart H—Standards for Processor-Based Signal and Train Control Systems

Source:70 FR 11095, Mar. 7, 2005, unless otherwise noted.

§ 236.901 Purpose and scope.

(a) What is the purpose of this subpart?  The purpose of this subpart is to promote the safe operation of processor-based signal and train control systems, subsystems, and components that are safety-critical products, as defined in § 236.903, and to facilitate the development of those products.

(b) What topics does it cover?  This subpart prescribes minimum, performance-based safety standards for safety-critical products, including requirements to ensure that the development, installation, implementation, inspection, testing, operation, maintenance, repair, and modification of those products will achieve and maintain an acceptable level of safety. This subpart also prescribes standards to ensure that personnel working with safety-critical products receive appropriate training. Each railroad may prescribe additional or more stringent rules, and other special instructions, that are not inconsistent with this subpart.

(c) What other rules apply? (1) This subpart does not exempt a railroad from compliance with the requirements of subparts A through G of this part, except to the extent a PSP explains to FRA Associate Administrator for Safety's satisfaction the following:

(i) How the objectives of any such requirements are met by the product;

(ii) Why the objectives of any such requirements are not relevant to the product; or

(iii) How the requirement is satisfied using alternative means. (See § 236.907(a)(14)).

(2) Products subject to this subpart are also subject to applicable requirements of parts 233, 234 and 235 of this chapter. See § 234.275 of this chapter with respect to use of this subpart to qualify certain products for use within highway-rail grade crossing warning systems.

(3) Information required to be submitted by this subpart that a submitter deems to be trade secrets, or commercial or financial information that is privileged or confidential under Exemption 4 of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4), shall be so labeled in accordance with the provisions of § 209.11 of this chapter. FRA handles information so labeled in accordance with the provisions of § 209.11 of this chapter.

§ 236.903 Definitions.

As used in this subpart—

Associate Administrator for Safety   means the Associate Administrator for Safety, FRA, or that person's delegate as designated in writing.

Component   means an element, device, or appliance (including those whose nature is electrical, mechanical, hardware, or software) that is part of a system or subsystem.

Configuration management control plan   means a plan designed to ensure that the proper and intended product configuration, including the hardware components and software version, is documented and maintained through the life-cycle of the products in use.

Employer   means a railroad, or contractor to a railroad, that directly engages or compensates individuals to perform the duties specified in § 236.921 (a).

Executive software   means software common to all installations of a given product. It generally is used to schedule the execution of the site-specific application programs, run timers, read inputs, drive outputs, perform self-diagnostics, access and check memory, and monitor the execution of the application software to detect unsolicited changes in outputs.

FRA   means the Federal Railroad Administration.

Full automatic operation   means that mode of an automatic train control system capable of operating without external human influence, in which the locomotive engineer/operator may act as a passive system monitor, in addition to an active system controller.

Hazard   means an existing or potential condition that can result in an accident.

High degree of confidence,   as applied to the highest level of aggregation, means there exists credible safety analysis supporting the conclusion that the likelihood of the proposed condition associated with the new product being less safe than the previous condition is very small.

Human factors   refers to a body of knowledge about human limitations, human abilities, and other human characteristics, such as behavior and motivation, that must be considered in product design.

Human-machine interface (HMI)   means the interrelated set of controls and displays that allows humans to interact with the machine.

Initialization   refers to the startup process when it is determined that a product has all required data input and the product is prepared to function as intended.

Mandatory directive   has the meaning set forth in § 220.5 of this chapter.

Materials handling   refers to explicit instructions for handling safety-critical components established to comply with procedures specified in the PSP.

Mean Time to Hazardous Event (MTTHE)   means the average or expected time that a subsystem or component will operate prior to the occurrence of an unsafe failure.

New or next-generation train control system   means a train control system using technologies not in use in revenue service at the time of PSP submission or without established histories of safe practice.

Petition for approval   means a petition to FRA for approval to use a product on a railroad as described in its PSP. The petition for approval is to contain information that is relevant to determining the safety of the resulting system; relevant to determining compliance with this part; and relevant to determining the safety of the product, including a complete copy of the product's PSP and supporting safety analysis.

Predefined change   means any post-implementation modification to the use of a product that is provided for in the PSP (see § 236.907(b)).

Previous Condition   refers to the estimated risk inherent in the portion of the existing method of operation that is relevant to the change under analysis (including the elements of any existing signal or train control system relevant to the review of the product).

Processor-based,   as used in this subpart, means dependent on a digital processor for its proper functioning.

Product   means a processor-based signal or train control system, subsystem, or component.

Product Safety Plan   (or PSP) refers to a formal document which describes in detail all of the safety aspects of the product, including but not limited to procedures for its development, installation, implementation, operation, maintenance, repair, inspection, testing and modification, as well as analyses supporting its safety claims, as described in § 236.907.

Railroad Safety Program Plan   (or RSPP) refers to a formal document which describes a railroad's strategy for addressing safety hazards associated with operation of products under this subpart and its program for execution of such strategy though the use of PSP requirements, as described in § 236.905.

Revision control   means a chain of custody regimen designed to positively identify safety-critical components and spare equipment availability, including repair/replacement tracking in accordance with procedures outlined in the PSP.

Risk   means the expected probability of occurrence for an individual accident event (probability) multiplied by the severity of the expected consequences associated with the accident (severity).

Risk assessment   means the process of determining, either quantitatively or qualitatively, the measure of risk associated with use of the product under all intended operating conditions or the previous condition.

Safety-critical,   as applied to a function, a system, or any portion thereof, means the correct performance of which is essential to safety of personnel or equipment, or both; or the incorrect performance of which could cause a hazardous condition, or allow a hazardous condition which was intended to be prevented by the function or system to exist.

Subsystem   means a defined portion of a system.

System   refers to a signal or train control system and includes all subsystems and components thereof, as the context requires.

System Safety Precedence   means the order of precedence in which methods used to eliminate or control identified hazards within a system are implemented.

Validation   means the process of determining whether a product's design requirements fulfill its intended design objectives during its development and life-cycle. The goal of the validation process is to determine “whether the correct product was built.”

Verification   means the process of determining whether the results of a given phase of the development cycle fulfill the validated requirements established at the start of that phase. The goal of the verification process is to determine “whether the product was built correctly.”

§ 236.905 Railroad Safety Program Plan (RSPP).

(a) What is the purpose of an RSPP?  A railroad subject to this subpart shall develop an RSPP, subject to FRA approval, that serves as its principal safety document for all safety-critical products. The RSPP must establish the minimum PSP requirements that will govern the development and implementation of all products subject to this subpart, consistent with the provisions contained in § 236.907.

(b) What subject areas must the RSPP address?  The railroad's RSPP must address, at a minimum, the following subject areas:

(1) Requirements and concepts.  The RSPP must require a description of the preliminary safety analysis, including:

(i) A complete description of methods used to evaluate a system's behavioral characteristics;

(ii) A complete description of risk assessment procedures;

(iii) The system safety precedence followed; and

(iv) The identification of the safety assessment process.

(2) Design for verification and validation.  The RSPP must require the identification of verification and validation methods for the preliminary safety analysis, initial development process, and future incremental changes, including standards to be used in the verification and validation process, consistent with appendix C to this part. The RSPP must require that references to any non-published standards be included in the PSP.

(3) Design for human factors.  The RSPP must require a description of the process used during product development to identify human factors issues and develop design requirements which address those issues.

(4) Configuration management control plan.  The RSPP must specify requirements for configuration management for all products to which this subpart applies.

(c) How are RSPP's approved? (1) Each railroad shall submit a petition for approval of an RSPP to the Associate Administrator for Safety, FRA, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., Mail Stop 25, Washington, DC 20590. The petition must contain a copy of the proposed RSPP, and the name, title, address, and telephone number of the railroad's primary contact person for review of the petition.

(2) Normally within 180 days of receipt of a petition for approval of an RSPP, FRA:

(i) Grants the petition, if FRA finds that the petition complies with applicable requirements of this subpart, attaching any special conditions to the approval of the petition as necessary to carry out the requirements of this subpart;

(ii) Denies the petition, setting forth reasons for denial; or

(iii) Requests additional information.

(3) If no action is taken on the petition within 180 days, the petition remains pending for decision. The petitioner is encouraged to contact FRA for information concerning its status.

(4) FRA may reopen consideration of any previously-approved petition for cause, providing reasons for such action.

(d) How are RSPP's modified? (1) Railroads shall obtain FRA approval for any modification to their RSPP which affects a safety-critical requirement of a PSP. Other modifications do not require FRA approval.

(2) Petitions for FRA approval of RSPP modifications are subject to the same procedures as petitions for initial RSPP approval, as specified in paragraph (c) of this section. In addition, such petitions must identify the proposed modification(s) to be made, the reason for the modification(s), and the effect of the modification(s) on safety.

[70 FR 11095, Mar. 7, 2005, as amended at 74 FR 25174, May 27, 2009]

§ 236.907 Product Safety Plan (PSP).

(a) What must a PSP contain?  The PSP must include the following:

(1) A complete description of the product, including a list of all product components and their physical relationship in the subsystem or system;

(2) A description of the railroad operation or categories of operations on which the product is designed to be used, including train movement density, gross tonnage, passenger train movement density, hazardous materials volume, railroad operating rules, and operating speeds;

(3) An operational concepts document, including a complete description of the product functionality and information flows;

(4) A safety requirements document, including a list with complete descriptions of all functions which the product performs to enhance or preserve safety;

(5) A document describing the manner in which product architecture satisfies safety requirements;

(6) A hazard log consisting of a comprehensive description of all safety-relevant hazards to be addressed during the life cycle of the product, including maximum threshold limits for each hazard (for unidentified hazards, the threshold shall be exceeded at one occurrence);

(7) A risk assessment, as prescribed in § 236.909 and appendix B to this part;

(8) A hazard mitigation analysis, including a complete and comprehensive description of all hazards to be addressed in the system design and development, mitigation techniques used, and system safety precedence followed, as prescribed by the applicable RSPP;

(9) A complete description of the safety assessment and verification and validation processes applied to the product and the results of these processes, describing how subject areas covered in appendix C to this part are either: addressed directly, addressed using other safety criteria, or not applicable;

(10) A complete description of the safety assurance concepts used in the product design, including an explanation of the design principles and assumptions;

(11) A human factors analysis, including a complete description of all human-machine interfaces, a complete description of all functions performed by humans in connection with the product to enhance or preserve safety, and an analysis in accordance with appendix E to this part or in accordance with other criteria if demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Associate Administrator for Safety to be equally suitable;

(12) A complete description of the specific training of railroad and contractor employees and supervisors necessary to ensure the safe and proper installation, implementation, operation, maintenance, repair, inspection, testing, and modification of the product;

(13) A complete description of the specific procedures and test equipment necessary to ensure the safe and proper installation, implementation, operation, maintenance, repair, inspection, testing, and modification of the product. These procedures, including calibration requirements, shall be consistent with or explain deviations from the equipment manufacturer's recommendations;

(14) An analysis of the applicability of the requirements of subparts A through G of this part to the product that may no longer apply or are satisfied by the product using an alternative method, and a complete explanation of the manner in which those requirements are otherwise fulfilled (see § 234.275 of this chapter and § 236.901(c));

(15) A complete description of the necessary security measures for the product over its life-cycle;

(16) A complete description of each warning to be placed in the Operations and Maintenance Manual identified in § 236.919, and of all warning labels required to be placed on equipment as necessary to ensure safety;

(17) A complete description of all initial implementation testing procedures necessary to establish that safety-functional requirements are met and safety-critical hazards are appropriately mitigated;

(18) A complete description of:

(i) All post-implementation testing (validation) and monitoring procedures, including the intervals necessary to establish that safety-functional requirements, safety-critical hazard mitigation processes, and safety-critical tolerances are not compromised over time, through use, or after maintenance (repair, replacement, adjustment) is performed; and

(ii) Each record necessary to ensure the safety of the system that is associated with periodic maintenance, inspections, tests, repairs, replacements, adjustments, and the system's resulting conditions, including records of component failures resulting in safety-relevant hazards (see § 236.917(e)(3));

(19) A complete description of any safety-critical assumptions regarding availability of the product, and a complete description of all backup methods of operation; and

(20) A complete description of all incremental and predefined changes (see paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section).

(b) What requirements apply to predefined changes? (1) Predefined changes are not considered design modifications requiring an entirely new safety verification process, a revised PSP, and an informational filing or petition for approval in accordance with § 236.915. However, the risk assessment for the product must demonstrate that operation of the product, as modified by any predefined change, satisfies the minimum performance standard.

(2) The PSP must identify configuration/revision control measures designed to ensure that safety-functional requirements and safety-critical hazard mitigation processes are not compromised as a result of any such change. (Software changes involving safety functional requirements or safety critical hazard mitigation processes for components in use are also addressed in paragraph (c) of this section.)

(c) What requirements apply to other product changes? (1) Incremental changes are planned product version changes described in the initial PSP where slightly different specifications are used to allow the gradual enhancement of the product's capabilities. Incremental changes shall require verification and validation to the extent the changes involve safety-critical functions.

(2) Changes classified as maintenance require validation.

(d) What are the responsibilities of the railroad and product supplier regarding communication of hazards? (1) The PSP shall specify all contractual arrangements with hardware and software suppliers for immediate notification of any and all safety critical software upgrades, patches, or revisions for their processor-based system, sub-system, or component, and the reasons for such changes from the suppliers, whether or not the railroad has experienced a failure of that safety-critical system, sub-system, or component.

(2) The PSP shall specify the railroad's procedures for action upon notification of a safety-critical upgrade, patch, or revision for this processor-based system, sub-system, or component, and until the upgrade, patch, or revision has been installed; and such action shall be consistent with the criterion set forth in § 236.915(d) as if the failure had occurred on that railroad.

(3) The PSP must identify configuration/revision control measures designed to ensure that safety-functional requirements and safety-critical hazard mitigation processes are not compromised as a result of any such change, and that any such change can be audited.

(4) Product suppliers entering into contractual arrangements for product support described in a PSP must promptly report any safety-relevant failures and previously unidentified hazards to each railroad using the product.

§ 236.909 Minimum performance standard.

(a) What is the minimum performance standard for products covered by this subpart?  The safety analysis included in the railroad's PSP must establish with a high degree of confidence that introduction of the product will not result in risk that exceeds the previous condition. The railroad shall determine, prior to filing its petition for approval or informational filing, that this standard has been met and shall make available the necessary analyses and documentation as provided in this subpart.

(b) How does FRA determine whether the PSP requirements for products covered by subpart H have been met?  With respect to any FRA review of a PSP, the Associate Administrator for Safety independently determines whether the railroad's safety case establishes with a high degree of confidence that introduction of the product will not result in risk that exceeds the previous condition. In evaluating the sufficiency of the railroad's case for the product, the Associate Administrator for Safety considers, as applicable, the factors pertinent to evaluation of risk assessments, listed in § 236.913(g)(2).

(c) What is the scope of a full risk assessment required by this section?  A full risk assessment performed under this subpart must address the safety risks affected by the introduction, modification, replacement, or enhancement of a product. This includes risks associated with the previous condition which are no longer present as a result of the change, new risks not present in the previous condition, and risks neither newly created nor eliminated whose nature (probability of occurrence or severity) is nonetheless affected by the change.

(d) What is an abbreviated risk assessment, and when may it be used? (1) An abbreviated risk assessment may be used in lieu of a full risk assessment to show compliance with the performance standard if:

(i) No new hazards are introduced as a result of the change;

(ii) Severity of each hazard associated with the previous condition does not increase from the previous condition; and

(iii) Exposure to such hazards does not change from the previous condition.

(2) An abbreviated risk assessment supports the finding required by paragraph (a) of this section if it establishes that the resulting MTTHE for the proposed product is greater than or equal to the MTTHE for the system, component or method performing the same function in the previous condition. This determination must be supported by credible safety analysis sufficient to persuade the Associate Administrator for Safety that the likelihood of the new product's MTTHE being less than the MTTHE for the system, component, or method performing the same function in the previous condition is very small.

(3) Alternatively, an abbreviated risk assessment supports the finding required by paragraph (a) of this section if:

(i) The probability of failure for each hazard of the product is equal to or less the corresponding recommended Specific Quantitative Hazard Probability Ratings classified as more favorable than “undesirable” by AREMA Manual Part 17.3.5 (Recommended Procedure for Hazard Identification and Management of Vital Electronic/Software-Based Equipment Used in Signal and Train Control Applications), or—in the case of a hazard classified as undesirable—the Associate Administrator for Safety concurs that mitigation of the hazard within the framework of the electronic system is not practical and the railroad proposes reasonable steps to undertake other mitigation. The Director of the Federal Register approves the incorporation by reference of the entire AREMA Communications and Signal Manual, Volume 4, Section 17—Quality Principles (2005) in this section in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. You may obtain a copy of the incorporated standard from American Railway Engineering and Maintenance of Way Association, 8201 Corporation Drive, Suite 1125, Landover, MD 20785-2230. You may inspect a copy of the incorporated standard at the Federal Railroad Administration, Docket Clerk, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., or at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to http://www.archives.gov/federal_register/code_of_federal_regulations/ibr_locations.html;

(ii) The product is developed in accordance with:

(A) AREMA Manual Part 17.3.1 (Communications and Signal Manual of Recommended Practices, Recommended Safety Assurance Program for Electronic/Software Based Products Used in Vital Signal Applications);

(B) AREMA Manual Part 17.3.3 (Communications and Signal Manual of Recommended Practices, Recommended Practice for Hardware Analysis for Vital Electronic/Software-Based Equipment Used in Signal and Train Control Applications);

(C) AREMA Manual Part 17.3.5 (Communications and Signal Manual of Recommended Practices, Recommended Practice for Hazard Identification and Management of Vital Electronic/Software-Based Equipment Used in Signal and Train Control Applications);

(D) Appendix C of this subpart; and

(iii) Analysis supporting the PSP suggests no credible reason for believing that the product will be less safe than the previous condition.

(e) How are safety and risk measured for the full risk assessment?  Risk assessment techniques, including both qualitative and quantitative methods, are recognized as providing credible and useful results for purposes of this section if they apply the following principles:

(1) Safety levels must be measured using competent risk assessment methods and must be expressed as the total residual risk in the system over its expected life-cycle after implementation of all mitigating measures described in the PSP. The total risk assessment must have a supporting sensitivity analysis. The analysis must confirm that the risk metrics of the system are not negatively affected by sensitivity analysis input parameters including, for example, component failure rates, human factor error rates, and variations in train traffic affecting exposure. In this context, “negatively affected” means that the final residual risk metric does not exceed that of the base case or that which has been otherwise established through MTTHE target. The sensitivity analysis must document the sensitivity to worst case failure scenarios. Appendix B to this part provides criteria for acceptable risk assessment methods. Other methods may be acceptable if demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Associate Administrator for Safety to be equally suitable.

(2) For the previous condition and for the life-cycle of the product, risk levels must be expressed in units of consequences per unit of exposure.

(i) In all cases exposure must be expressed as total train miles traveled per year over the relevant railroad infrastructure. Consequences must identify the total cost, including fatalities, injuries, property damage, and other incidental costs, such as potential consequences of hazardous materials involvement, resulting from preventable accidents associated with the function(s) performed by the system.

(ii) In those cases where there is passenger traffic, a second risk metric must be calculated, using passenger-miles traveled per year as the exposure, and total societal costs of passenger injuries and fatalities, resulting from preventable accidents associated with the function(s) performed by the system, as the consequences.

(3) If the description of railroad operations for the product required by § 236.907(a)(2) involves changes to the physical or operating conditions on the railroad prior to or within the expected life cycle of the product subject to review under this subpart, the previous condition shall be adjusted to reflect the lower risk associated with systems needed to maintain safety and performance at higher speeds or traffic volumes. In particular, the previous condition must be adjusted for assumed implementation of systems necessary to support higher train speeds as specified in § 236.0, as well as other changes required to support projected increases in train operations. The following specific requirements apply:

(i) If the current method of operation would not be adequate under § 236.0 for the proposed operations, then the adjusted previous condition must include a system as required under § 236.0, applied as follows:

(A) The minimum system where a passenger train is operated at a speed of 60 or more miles per hour, or a freight train is operated at a speed of 50 or more miles per hour, shall be a traffic control system;

(B) The minimum system where a train is operated at a speed of 80 or more miles per hour, but not more than 110 miles per hour, shall be an automatic cab signal system with automatic train control; and

(C) The minimum system where a train is operated at a speed of more than 110 miles per hour shall be a system determined by the Associate Administrator for Safety to provide an equivalent level of safety to systems required or authorized by FRA for comparable operations.

(ii) If the current method of operation would be adequate under § 236.0 for the proposed operations, but the current system is not at least as safe as a traffic control system, then the adjusted previous condition must include a traffic control system in the event of any change that results in:

(A) An annual average daily train density of more than twelve trains per day; or

(B) An increase in the annual average daily density of passenger trains of more than four trains per day.

(iii) Paragraph (e)(3)(ii)(A) of this section shall apply in all situations where train volume will exceed more than 20 trains per day but shall not apply to situations where train volume will exceed 12 trains per day but not exceed 20 trains per day, if in its PSP the railroad makes a showing sufficient to establish, in the judgment of the Associate Administrator for Safety, that the current method of operation is adequate for a specified volume of traffic in excess of 12 trains per day, but not more than 20 trains per day, without material delay in the movement of trains over the territory and without unreasonable expenditures to expedite those movements when compared with the expense of installing and maintaining a traffic control system.

(4) In the case review of a PSP that has been consolidated with a proceeding pursuant to part 235 of this subchapter (see § 236.911(b)), the base case shall be determined as follows:

(i) If FRA determines that discontinuance or modification of the system should be granted without regard to whether the product is installed on the territory, then the base case shall be the conditions that would obtain on the territory following the discontinuance or modification.

Note:

This is an instance in which the base case is posited as greater risk than the actual (unadjusted) previous condition because the railroad would have obtained relief from the requirement to maintain the existing signal or train control system even if no new product had been proffered.

(ii) If FRA determines that discontinuance or modification of the system should be denied without regard to whether the product is installed on the territory, then the base case shall remain the previous condition (unadjusted).

(iii) If, after consideration of the application and review of the PSP, FRA determines that neither paragraph (e)(4)(i) nor paragraph (e)(4)(ii) of this section should apply, FRA will establish a base case that is consistent with safety and in the public interest.

[70 FR 11095, Mar. 7, 2005, as amended at 74 FR 25174, May 27, 2009; 75 FR 2699, Jan. 15, 2010]

§ 236.911 Exclusions.

(a) Does this subpart apply to existing systems?  The requirements of this subpart do not apply to products in service as of June 6, 2005. Railroads may continue to implement and use these products and components from these existing products.

(b) How will transition cases be handled?  Products designed in accordance with subparts A through G of this part which are not in service but are developed or are in the developmental stage prior to March 7, 2005, may be excluded upon notification to FRA by June 6, 2005, if placed in service by March 7, 2008. Railroads may continue to implement and use these products and components from these existing products. A railroad may at any time elect to have products that are excluded made subject to this subpart by submitting a PSP as prescribed in § 236.913 and otherwise complying with this subpart.

(c) How are office systems handled?  The requirements of this subpart do not apply to existing office systems and future deployments of existing office system technology. However, a subsystem or component of an office system must comply with the requirements of this subpart if it performs safety-critical functions within, or affects the safety performance of, a new or next-generation train control system. For purposes of this section, “office system” means a centralized computer-aided train-dispatching system or centralized traffic control board.

(d) How are modifications to excluded products handled?  Changes or modifications to products otherwise excluded from the requirements of this subpart by this section are not excluded from the requirements of this subpart if they result in a degradation of safety or a material increase in safety-critical functionality.

(e) What other rules apply to excluded products?  Products excluded by this section from the requirements of this subpart remain subject to subparts A through G of this part as applicable.

§ 236.913 Filing and approval of PSPs.

(a) Under what circumstances must a PSP be prepared?  A PSP must be prepared for each product covered by this subpart. A joint PSP must be prepared when:

(1) The territory on which a product covered by this subpart is normally subject to joint operations, or is operated upon by more than one railroad; and

(2) The PSP involves a change in method of operation.

(b) Under what circumstances must a railroad submit a petition for approval for a PSP or PSP amendment, and when may a railroad submit an informational filing?  Depending on the nature of the proposed product or change, the railroad shall submit either an informational filing or a petition for approval. Submission of a petition for approval is required for PSPs or PSP amendments concerning installation of new or next-generation train control systems. All other actions that result in the creation of a PSP or PSP amendment require an informational filing and are handled according to the procedures outlined in paragraph (c) of this section. Applications for discontinuance and material modification of signal and train control systems remain governed by parts 235 and 211 of this chapter; and petitions subject to this section may be consolidated with any relevant application for administrative handling.

(c) What are the procedures for informational filings?  The following procedures apply to PSPs and PSP amendments which do not require submission of a petition for approval, but rather require an informational filing:

(1) Not less than 180 days prior to planned use of the product in revenue service as described in the PSP or PSP amendment, the railroad shall submit an informational filing to the Associate Administrator for Safety, FRA, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., Mail Stop 25, Washington, DC 20590. The informational filing must provide a summary description of the PSP or PSP amendment, including the intended use of the product, and specify the location where the documentation as described in § 236.917(a)(1) is maintained.

(2) Within 60 days of receipt of the informational filing, FRA:

(i) Acknowledges receipt of the filing;

(ii) Acknowledges receipt of the informational filing and requests further information; or

(iii) Acknowledges receipt of the filing and notifies the railroad, for good cause, that the filing will be considered as a petition for approval as set forth in paragraph (d) of this section, and requests such further information as may be required to initiate action on the petition for approval. Examples of good cause, any one of which is sufficient, include: the PSP describes a product with unique architectural concepts; the PSP describes a product that uses design or safety assurance concepts considered outside existing accepted practices (see appendix C); and the PSP describes a locomotive-borne product that commingles safety-critical train control processing functions with locomotive operational functions. In addition, good cause includes any instance where the PSP or PSP amendment does not appear to support its safety claim of satisfaction of the performance standard, after FRA has requested further information as provided in paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this section.

(d) What procedures apply to petitions for approval?  The following procedures apply to PSPs and PSP amendments which require submission of a petition for approval:

(1) Petitions for approval involving prior FRA consultation. (i) The railroad may file a Notice of Product Development with the Associate Administrator for Safety not less than 30 days prior to the end of the system design review phase of product development and 180 days prior to planned implementation, inviting FRA to participate in the design review process and receive periodic briefings and updates as needed to follow the course of product development. At a minimum, the Notice of Product Development must contain a summary description of the product to be developed and a brief description of goals for improved safety.

(ii) Within 15 days of receipt of the Notice of Product Development, the Associate Administrator for Safety either acknowledges receipt or acknowledges receipt and requests more information.

(iii) If FRA concludes that the Notice of Product Development contains sufficient information, the Associate Administrator for Safety determines the extent and nature of the assessment and review necessary for final product approval. FRA may convene a technical consultation as necessary to discuss issues related to the design and planned development of the product.

(iv) Within 60 days of receiving the Notice of Product Development, the Associate Administrator for Safety provides a letter of preliminary review with detailed findings, including whether the design concepts of the proposed product comply with the requirements of this subpart, whether design modifications are necessary to meet the requirements of this subpart, and the extent and nature of the safety analysis necessary to comply with this subpart.

(v) Not less than 60 days prior to use of the product in revenue service, the railroad shall file with the Associate Administrator for Safety a petition for final approval.

(vi) Within 30 days of receipt of the petition for final approval, the Associate Administrator for Safety either acknowledges receipt or acknowledges receipt and requests more information. Whenever possible, FRA acts on the petition for final approval within 60 days of its filing by either granting it or denying it. If FRA neither grants nor denies the petition for approval within 60 days, FRA advises the petitioner of the projected time for decision and conducts any further consultations or inquiries necessary to decide the matter.

(2) Other petitions for approval.  The following procedures apply to petitions for approval of PSPs which do not involve prior FRA consultation as described in paragraph (d)(1) of this section.

(i) Not less than 180 days prior to use of a product in revenue service, the railroad shall file with the Associate Administrator for Safety a petition for approval.

(ii) Within 60 days of receipt of the petition for approval, FRA either acknowledges receipt, or acknowledges receipt and requests more information.

(iii) Whenever possible, considering the scope, complexity, and novelty of the product or change, FRA acts on the petition for approval within 180 days of its filing by either granting it or denying it. If FRA neither grants nor denies the petition for approval within 180 days, it remains pending, and FRA provides the petitioner with a statement of reasons why the petition has not yet been approved.

(e) What role do product users play in the process of safety review? (1) FRA will publish in the Federal Register periodically a topic list including docket numbers for informational filings and a petition summary including docket numbers for petitions for approval.

(2) Interested parties may submit to FRA information and views pertinent to FRA's consideration of an informational filing or petition for approval. FRA considers comments to the extent practicable within the periods set forth in this section. In a proceeding consolidated with a proceeding under part 235 of this chapter, FRA considers all comments received.

(f) Is it necessary to complete field testing prior to filing the petition for approval?  A railroad may file a petition for approval prior to completion of field testing of the product. The petition for approval should additionally include information sufficient for FRA to arrange monitoring of the tests. The Associate Administrator for Safety may approve a petition for approval contingent upon successful completion of the test program contained in the PSP or hold the petition for approval pending completion of the tests.

(g) How are PSPs approved? (1) The Associate Administrator for Safety grants approval of a PSP when:

(i) The petition for approval has been properly filed and contains the information required in § 236.907;

(ii) FRA has determined that the PSP complies with the railroad's approved RSPP and applicable requirements of this subpart; and

(iii) The risk assessment supporting the PSP demonstrates that the proposed product satisfies the minimum performance standard stated in § 236.909.

(2) The Associate Administrator for Safety considers the following applicable factors when evaluating the risk assessment:

(i) The extent to which recognized standards have been utilized in product design and in the relevant safety analysis;

(ii) The availability of quantitative data, including calculations of statistical confidence levels using accepted methods, associated with risk estimates;

(iii) The complexity of the product and the extent to which it will incorporate or deviate from design practices associated with previously established histories of safe operation;

(iv) The degree of rigor and precision associated with the safety analyses, including the comprehensiveness of the qualitative analyses, and the extent to which any quantitative results realistically reflect appropriate sensitivity cases;

(v) The extent to which validation of the product has included experiments and tests to identify uncovered faults in the operation of the product;

(vi) The extent to which identified faults are effectively addressed;

(vii) Whether the risk assessment for the previous condition was conducted using the same methodology as that for operation under the proposed condition; and

(viii) If an independent third-party assessment is required or is performed at the election of the supplier or railroad, the extent to which the results of the assessment are favorable.

(3) The Associate Administrator for Safety also considers when assessing PSPs the safety requirements for the product within the context of the proposed method of operations, including:

(i) The degree to which the product is relied upon as the primary safety system for train operations; and

(ii) The degree to which the product is overlaid upon and its operation is demonstrated to be independent of safety-relevant rules, practices and systems that will remain in place following the change under review.

(4) As necessary to ensure compliance with this subpart and with the RSPP, FRA may attach special conditions to the approval of the petition.

(5) Following the approval of a petition, FRA may reopen consideration of the petition for cause. Cause for reopening a petition includes such circumstances as a credible allegation of error or fraud, assumptions determined to be invalid as a result of in-service experience, or one or more unsafe events calling into question the safety analysis underlying the approval.

(h) Under what circumstances may a third-party assessment be required, and by whom may it be conducted? (1) The PSP must be supported by an independent third party assessment of the product when FRA concludes it is necessary based upon consideration of the following factors:

(i) Those factors listed in paragraphs (g)(2)(i) through (g)(2)(vii) of this section;

(ii) The sufficiency of the assessment or audit previously conducted at the election of a supplier or railroad; and

(iii) Whether applicable requirements of subparts A through G of this part are satisfied.

(2) As used in this section, “independent third party” means a technically competent entity responsible to and compensated by the railroad (or an association on behalf of one or more railroads) that is independent of the supplier of the product. An entity that is owned or controlled by the supplier, that is under common ownership or control with the supplier, or that is otherwise involved in the development of the product is not considered “independent” within the meaning of this section. FRA may maintain a roster of recognized technically competent entities as a service to railroads selecting reviewers under this section; however, a railroad is not limited to entities currently listed on any such roster.

(3) The third-party assessment must, at a minimum, consist of the activities and result in production of documentation meeting the requirements of Appendix D to this part. However, when requiring an assessment pursuant to this section, FRA specifies any requirements in Appendix D to this part which the agency has determined are not relevant to its concerns and, therefore, need not be included in the assessment. The railroad shall make the final assessment report available to FRA upon request.

(i) How may a PSP be amended?  A railroad may submit an amendment to a PSP at any time in the same manner as the initial PSP. Notwithstanding the otherwise applicable requirements found in this section and § 236.915, changes affecting the safety-critical functionality of a product may be made prior to the submission and approval of the PSP amendment as necessary in order to mitigate risk.

(j) How may field testing be conducted prior to PSP approval? (1) Field testing of a product may be conducted prior to the approval of a PSP by the submission of an informational filing by a railroad. The FRA will arrange to monitor the tests based on the information provided in the filing, which must include:

(i) A complete description of the product;

(ii) An operational concepts document;

(iii) A complete description of the specific test procedures, including the measures that will be taken to protect trains and on-track equipment;

(iv) An analysis of the applicability of the requirements of subparts A through G of this part to the product that will not apply during testing;

(v) The date testing will begin;

(vi) The location of the testing; and

(vii) A description of any effect the testing will have on the current method of operation.

(2) FRA may impose such additional conditions on this testing as may be necessary for the safety of train operations. Exemptions from regulations other than those contained in this part must be requested through waiver procedures in part 211 of this chapter.

[70 FR 11095, Mar. 7, 2005, as amended at 70 FR 72385, Dec. 5, 2005; 74 FR 25174, May 27, 2009]

§ 236.915 Implementation and operation.

(a) When may a product be placed or retained in service? (1) Except as stated in paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section, a railroad may operate in revenue service any product 180 days after filing with FRA the informational filing for that product. The FRA filing date can be found in FRA's acknowledgment letter referred to in § 236.913(c)(2).

(2) Except as stated in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, if FRA approval is required for a product, the railroad shall not operate the product in revenue service until after the Associate Administrator for Safety has approved the petition for approval for that product pursuant to § 236.913.

(3) If after product implementation FRA elects, for cause, to treat the informational filing for the product as a petition for approval, the product may remain in use if otherwise consistent with the applicable law and regulations. FRA may impose special conditions for use of the product during the period of review for cause.

(b) How does the PSP relate to operation of the product?  Each railroad shall comply with all provisions in the PSP for each product it uses and shall operate within the scope of initial operational assumptions and predefined changes identified by the PSP. Railroads may at any time submit an amended PSP according to the procedures outlined in § 236.913.

(c) What precautions must be taken prior to interference with the normal functioning of a product?  The normal functioning of any safety-critical product must not be interfered with in testing or otherwise without first taking measures to provide for safe movement of trains, locomotives, roadway workers and on-track equipment that depend on normal functioning of such product.

(d) What actions must be taken immediately upon failure of a safety-critical component?  When any safety-critical product component fails to perform its intended function, the cause must be determined and the faulty component adjusted, repaired, or replaced without undue delay. Until repair of such essential components are completed, a railroad shall take appropriate action as specified in the PSP. See also §§ 236.907(d), 236.917(b).

§ 236.917 Retention of records.

(a) What life-cycle and maintenance records must be maintained? (1) The railroad shall maintain at a designated office on the railroad:

(i) For the life-cycle of the product, adequate documentation to demonstrate that the PSP meets the safety requirements of the railroad's RSPP and applicable standards in this subpart, including the risk assessment; and

(ii) An Operations and Maintenance Manual, pursuant to § 236.919; and

(iii) Training records pursuant to § 236.923(b).

(2) Results of inspections and tests specified in the PSP must be recorded as prescribed in § 236.110.

(3) Contractors of the railroad shall maintain at a designated office training records pursuant to § 236.923(b).

(b) What actions must the railroad take in the event of occurrence of a safety-relevant hazard?  After the product is placed in service, the railroad shall maintain a database of all safety-relevant hazards as set forth in the PSP and those that had not been previously identified in the PSP. If the frequency of the safety-relevant hazards exceeds the threshold set forth in the PSP (see § 236.907(a)(6)), then the railroad shall:

(1) Report the inconsistency in writing (by mail, facsimile, e-mail, or hand delivery to the Director, Office of Safety Assurance and Compliance, FRA, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., Mail Stop 25, Washington, DC 20590, within 15 days of discovery. Documents that are hand delivered must not be enclosed in an envelope;

(2) Take prompt countermeasures to reduce the frequency of the safety-relevant hazard(s) below the threshold set forth in the PSP; and

(3) Provide a final report to the FRA Director, Office of Safety Assurance and Compliance, on the results of the analysis and countermeasures taken to reduce the frequency of the safety-relevant hazard(s) below the threshold set forth in the PSP when the problem is resolved.

[70 FR 11095, Mar. 7, 2005, as amended at 74 FR 25174, May 27, 2009]

§ 236.919 Operations and Maintenance Manual.

(a) The railroad shall catalog and maintain all documents as specified in the PSP for the installation, maintenance, repair, modification, inspection, and testing of the product and have them in one Operations and Maintenance Manual, readily available to persons required to perform such tasks and for inspection by FRA and FRA-certified State inspectors.

(b) Plans required for proper maintenance, repair, inspection, and testing of safety-critical products must be adequate in detail and must be made available for inspection by FRA and FRA-certified State inspectors where such products are deployed or maintained. They must identify all software versions, revisions, and revision dates. Plans must be legible and correct.

(c) Hardware, software, and firmware revisions must be documented in the Operations and Maintenance Manual according to the railroad's configuration management control plan and any additional configuration/revision control measures specified in the PSP.

(d) Safety-critical components, including spare equipment, must be positively identified, handled, replaced, and repaired in accordance with the procedures specified in the PSP.

§ 236.921 Training and qualification program, general.

(a) When is training necessary and who must be trained?  Employers shall establish and implement training and qualification programs for products subject to this subpart. These programs must meet the minimum requirements set forth in the PSP and in §§ 236.923 through 236.929 as appropriate, for the following personnel:

(1) Persons whose duties include installing, maintaining, repairing, modifying, inspecting, and testing safety-critical elements of the railroad's products, including central office, wayside, or onboard subsystems;

(2) Persons who dispatch train operations (issue or communicate any mandatory directive that is executed or enforced, or is intended to be executed or enforced, by a train control system subject to this subpart);

(3) Persons who operate trains or serve as a train or engine crew member subject to instruction and testing under part 217 of this chapter, on a train operating in territory where a train control system subject to this subpart is in use;

(4) Roadway workers whose duties require them to know and understand how a train control system affects their safety and how to avoid interfering with its proper functioning; and

(5) The direct supervisors of persons listed in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(4) of this section.

(b) What competencies are required?  The employer's program must provide training for persons who perform the functions described in paragraph (a) of this section to ensure that they have the necessary knowledge and skills to effectively complete their duties related to processor-based signal and train control equipment.

§ 236.923 Task analysis and basic requirements.

(a) How must training be structured and delivered?  As part of the program required by § 236.921, the employer shall, at a minimum:

(1) Identify the specific goals of the training program with regard to the target population (craft, experience level, scope of work, etc.), task(s), and desired success rate;

(2) Based on a formal task analysis, identify the installation, maintenance, repair, modification, inspection, testing, and operating tasks that must be performed on a railroad's products. This includes the development of failure scenarios and the actions expected under such scenarios;

(3) Develop written procedures for the performance of the tasks identified;

(4) Identify the additional knowledge, skills, and abilities above those required for basic job performance necessary to perform each task;

(5) Develop a training curriculum that includes classroom, simulator, computer-based, hands-on, or other formally structured training designed to impart the knowledge, skills, and abilities identified as necessary to perform each task;

(6) Prior to assignment of related tasks, require all persons mentioned in § 236.921(a) to successfully complete a training curriculum and pass an examination that covers the product and appropriate rules and tasks for which they are responsible (however, such persons may perform such tasks under the direct onsite supervision of a qualified person prior to completing such training and passing the examination);

(7) Require periodic refresher training at intervals specified in the PSP that includes classroom, simulator, computer-based, hands-on, or other formally structured training and testing, except with respect to basic skills for which proficiency is known to remain high as a result of frequent repetition of the task; and

(8) Conduct regular and periodic evaluations of the effectiveness of the training program specified in § 236.923(a)(1) verifying the adequacy of the training material and its validity with respect to current railroads products and operations.

(b) What training records are required?  Employers shall retain records which designate persons who are qualified under this section until new designations are recorded or for at least one year after such persons leave applicable service. These records shall be kept in a designated location and be available for inspection and replication by FRA and FRA-certified State inspectors.

§ 236.925 Training specific to control office personnel.

Any person responsible for issuing or communicating mandatory directives in territory where products are or will be in use must be trained in the following areas, as applicable:

(a) Instructions concerning the interface between the computer-aided dispatching system and the train control system, with respect to the safe movement of trains and other on-track equipment;

(b) Railroad operating rules applicable to the train control system, including provision for movement and protection of roadway workers, unequipped trains, trains with failed or cut-out train control onboard systems, and other on-track equipment; and

(c) Instructions concerning control of trains and other on-track equipment in case the train control system fails, including periodic practical exercises or simulations, and operational testing under part 217 of this chapter to ensure the continued capability of the personnel to provide for safe operations under the alternative method of operation.

§ 236.927 Training specific to locomotive engineers and other operating personnel.

(a) What elements apply to operating personnel?  Training provided under this subpart for any locomotive engineer or other person who participates in the operation of a train in train control territory must be defined in the PSP and the following elements must be addressed:

(1) Familiarization with train control equipment onboard the locomotive and the functioning of that equipment as part of the system and in relation to other onboard systems under that person's control;

(2) Any actions required of the onboard personnel to enable, or enter data to, the system, such as consist data, and the role of that function in the safe operation of the train;

(3) Sequencing of interventions by the system, including pre-enforcement notification, enforcement notification, penalty application initiation and post-penalty application procedures;

(4) Railroad operating rules applicable to the train control system, including provisions for movement and protection of any unequipped trains, or trains with failed or cut-out train control onboard systems and other on-track equipment;

(5) Means to detect deviations from proper functioning of onboard train control equipment and instructions regarding the actions to be taken with respect to control of the train and notification of designated railroad personnel; and

(6) Information needed to prevent unintentional interference with the proper functioning of onboard train control equipment.

(b) How must locomotive engineer training be conducted?  Training required under this subpart for a locomotive engineer, together with required records, must be integrated into the program of training required by part 240 of this chapter.

(c) What requirements apply to full automatic operation?  The following special requirements apply in the event a train control system is used to effect full automatic operation of the train:

(1) The PSP must identify all safety hazards to be mitigated by the locomotive engineer.

(2) The PSP must address and describe the training required with provisions for the maintenance of skills proficiency. As a minimum, the training program must:

(i) As described in § 236.923(a)(2), develop failure scenarios which incorporate the safety hazards identified in the PSP, including the return of train operations to a fully manual mode;

(ii) Provide training, consistent with § 236.923(a), for safe train operations under all failure scenarios and identified safety hazards that affect train operations;

(iii) Provide training, consistent with § 236.923(a), for safe train operations under manual control; and

(iv) Consistent with § 236.923(a), ensure maintenance of manual train operating skills by requiring manual starting and stopping of the train for an appropriate number of trips and by one or more of the following methods:

(A) Manual operation of a train for a 4-hour work period;

(B) Simulated manual operation of a train for a minimum of 4 hours in a Type I simulator as required; or

(C) Other means as determined following consultation between the railroad and designated representatives of the affected employees and approved by the FRA. The PSP must designate the appropriate frequency when manual operation, starting, and stopping must be conducted, and the appropriate frequency of simulated manual operation.

§ 236.929 Training specific to roadway workers.

(a) How is training for roadway workers to be coordinated with part 214?  Training required under this subpart for a roadway worker must be integrated into the program of instruction required under part 214, subpart C of this chapter (“Roadway Worker Protection”), consistent with task analysis requirements of § 236.923. This training must provide instruction for roadway workers who provide protection for themselves or roadway work groups.

(b) What subject areas must roadway worker training include? (1) Instruction for roadway workers must ensure an understanding of the role of processor-based signal and train control equipment in establishing protection for roadway workers and their equipment.

(2) Instruction for roadway workers must ensure recognition of processor-based signal and train control equipment on the wayside and an understanding of how to avoid interference with its proper functioning.

(3) Instructions concerning the recognition of system failures and the provision of alternative methods of on-track safety in case the train control system fails, including periodic practical exercises or simulations and operational testing under part 217 of this chapter to ensure the continued capability of roadway workers to be free from the danger of being struck by a moving train or other on-track equipment.

Subpart I—Positive Train Control Systems

Source:75 FR 2699, Jan. 15, 2010, unless otherwise noted.

§ 236.1001 Purpose and scope.

(a) This subpart prescribes minimum, performance-based safety standards for PTC systems required by 49 U.S.C. 20157, this subpart, or an FRA order, including requirements to ensure that the development, functionality, architecture, installation, implementation, inspection, testing, operation, maintenance, repair, and modification of those PTC systems will achieve and maintain an acceptable level of safety. This subpart also prescribes standards to ensure that personnel working with, and affected by, safety-critical PTC system related products receive appropriate training and testing.

(b) Each railroad may prescribe additional or more stringent rules, and other special instructions, that are not inconsistent with this subpart.

(c) This subpart does not exempt a railroad from compliance with any requirement of subparts A through H of this part or parts 233, 234, and 235 of this chapter, unless:

(1) It is otherwise explicitly excepted by this subpart; or

(2) The applicable PTCSP, as defined under § 236.1003 and approved by FRA under § 236.1015, provides for such an exception per § 236.1013.

§ 236.1003 Definitions.

(a) Definitions contained in subparts G and H of this part apply equally to this subpart.

(b) The following definitions apply to terms used only in this subpart unless otherwise stated:

After-arrival mandatory directive   means an authority to occupy a track which is issued to a train that is not effective and not to be acted upon until after the arrival and passing of a train, or trains, specifically identified in the authority.

Associate Administrator   means the FRA Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety/Chief Safety Officer.

Class I railroad   means a railroad which in the last year for which revenues were reported exceeded the threshold established under regulations of the Surface Transportation Board (49 CFR part 1201.1-1 (2008)).

Cleartext   means the un-encrypted text in its original, human readable, form. It is the input of an encryption or encipher process, and the output of an decryption or decipher process.

Controlling locomotive   means Locomotive, controlling, as defined in § 232.5 of this chapter.

Cut out   means any disabling of a PTC system, subsystem, or component en route (including when the PTC system cuts out on its own or a person cuts out the system with authorization), unless the cut out was necessary to exit PTC-governed territory and enter non-PTC territory.

Host railroad   means a railroad that has effective operating control over a segment of track.

Initialization failure   means any instance when a PTC system fails to activate on a locomotive or train, unless the PTC system successfully activates during a subsequent attempt in the same location or before entering PTC-governed territory. For the types of PTC systems that do not initialize by design, a failed departure test is considered an initialization failure for purposes of the reporting requirement under § 236.1029(h), unless the PTC system successfully passes the departure test during a subsequent attempt in the same location or before entering PTC-governed territory.

Interoperability   means the ability of a controlling locomotive to communicate with and respond to the PTC railroad's positive train control system, including uninterrupted movements over property boundaries.

Limited operations   means operations on main line track that have limited or no freight operations and are approved to be excluded from this subpart's PTC system implementation and operation requirements in accordance with § 236.1019(c);

Main line   means, except as provided in § 236.1019 or where all trains are limited to restricted speed within a yard or terminal area or on auxiliary or industry tracks, a segment or route of railroad tracks:

(1) Of a Class I railroad, as documented in current timetables filed by the Class I railroad with the FRA under § 217.7 of this title, over which 5,000,000 or more gross tons of railroad traffic is transported annually; or

(2) Used for regularly scheduled intercity or commuter rail passenger service, as defined in 49 U.S.C. 24102, or both. Tourist, scenic, historic, or excursion operations as defined in part 238 of this chapter are not considered intercity or commuter passenger service for purposes of this part.

Main line track exclusion addendum   (“MTEA”) means the document submitted under §§ 236.1011 and 236.1019 requesting to designate track as other than main line.

Malfunction   means any instance when a PTC system, subsystem, or component fails to perform the functions mandated under 49 U.S.C. 20157(i)(5), this subpart, or the applicable host railroad's PTCSP.

Medium speed   means, Speed, medium, as defined in subpart G of this part.

NPI   means a Notice of Product Intent (“NPI”) as further described in § 236.1013.

PIH materials   means materials poisonous by inhalation, as defined in §§ 171.8, 173.115, and 173.132 of this title.

PTC   means positive train control as further described in § 236.1005.

PTCDP   means a PTC Development Plan as further described in § 236.1013.

PTCIP   means a PTC Implementation Plan as required under 49 U.S.C. 20157 and further described in § 236.1011.

PTCPVL   means a PTC Product Vendor List as further described in § 236.1023.

PTCSP   means a PTC Safety Plan as further described in § 236.1015.

PTC railroad   means each Class I railroad and each entity providing regularly scheduled intercity or commuter rail passenger transportation required to implement or operate a PTC system.

PTC System Certification   means certification as required under 49 U.S.C. 20157 and further described in §§ 236.1009 and 236.1015.

Request for Amendment   (“RFA”) means a request for an amendment of a plan or system made by a PTC railroad in accordance with § 236.1021.

Request for Expedited Certification   (“REC”) means, as further described in § 236.1031, a request by a railroad to receive expedited consideration for PTC System Certification.

Restricted speed   means, Speed, restricted, as defined in subpart G of this part.

Safe State   means a system state that, when the system fails, cannot cause death, injury, occupational illness, or damage to or loss of equipment or property, or damage to the environment.

Segment of track   means any part of the railroad where a train operates.

Temporal separation   means that passenger and freight operations do not operate on any segment of shared track during the same period and as further defined under § 236.1019 and the process or processes in place to assure that result.

Tenant railroad   means a railroad, other than a host railroad, operating on track upon which a PTC system is required.

Track segment   means segment of track.

Type Approval   means a number assigned to a particular PTC system indicating FRA agreement that the PTC system could fulfill the requirements of this subpart.

Train   means one or more locomotives, coupled with or without cars.

[75 FR 2699, Jan. 15, 2010, as amended at 77 FR 28305, May 14, 2012; 79 FR 49716, Aug. 22, 2014; 86 FR 40180, July 27, 2021]

§ 236.1005 Requirements for Positive Train Control systems.

(a) PTC system requirements.  Each PTC system required to be installed under this subpart shall:

(1) Reliably and functionally prevent:

(i) Train-to-train collisions—including collisions between trains operating over rail-to-rail at-grade crossings in accordance with the following risk-based table or alternative arrangements providing an equivalent level of safety as specified in an FRA approved PTCSP:

Crossing type

Max. speed

Protectionrequired

(A) Interlocking—one or more PTC routes intersecting with one or more non-PTC routes

≤40 miles per hour

Interlocking signal arrangement in accordance with the requirements of subparts A-G of this part and PTC enforced stop on PTC routes.

(B) Interlocking—one or more PTC routes intersecting with one or more non-PTC routes

>40 miles per hour

Interlocking signal arrangement in accordance with the requirements of subparts A-G of this part, PTC enforced stop on all PTC routes, and either the use of other than full PTC technology that provides positive stop enforcement or a split-point derail incorporated into the signal system accompanied by 20 miles per hour maximum allowable speed on the approach of any intersecting non-PTC route.

(C) Interlocking—all PTC routes intersecting

Any speed

Interlocking signal arrangements in accordance with the requirements of subparts A-G of this part, and PTC enforced stop on all routes.

(ii) Overspeed derailments, including derailments related to railroad civil engineering speed restrictions, slow orders, and excessive speeds over switches and through turnouts;

(iii) Incursions into established work zone limits without first receiving appropriate authority and verification from the dispatcher or roadway worker in charge, as applicable and in accordance with part 214 of this chapter; and

(iv) The movement of a train through a main line switch in the improper position as further described in paragraph (e) of this section.

(2) Include safety-critical integration of all authorities and indications of a wayside or cab signal system, or other similar appliance, method, device, or system of equivalent safety, in a manner by which the PTC system shall provide associated warning and enforcement to the extent, and except as, described and justified in the FRA approved PTCDP or PTCSP, as applicable;

(3) As applicable, perform the additional functions specified in this subpart;

(4) Provide an appropriate warning or enforcement when:

(i) A derail or switch protecting access to the main line required by § 236.1007, or otherwise provided for in the applicable PTCSP, is not in its derailing or protecting position, respectively;

(ii) A mandatory directive is issued associated with a highway-rail grade crossing warning system malfunction as required by §§ 234.105, 234.106, or 234.107;

(iii) An after-arrival mandatory directive has been issued and the train or trains to be waited on has not yet passed the location of the receiving train;

(iv) Any movable bridge within the route ahead is not in a position to allow permissive indication for a train movement pursuant to § 236.312; and

(v) A hazard detector integrated into the PTC system that is required by paragraph (c) of this section, or otherwise provided for in the applicable PTCSP, detects an unsafe condition or transmits an alarm; and

(5) Limit the speed of passenger and freight trains to 59 miles per hour and 49 miles per hour, respectively, in areas without broken rail detection or equivalent safeguards.

(b) PTC system installation —(1) Lines required to be equipped.  Except as otherwise provided in this subpart, each Class I railroad and each railroad providing or hosting intercity or commuter passenger service shall progressively equip its lines as provided in its approved PTCIP such that a PTC system certified under § 236.1015 is installed and operated by the host railroad on each:

(i) Main line over which is transported any quantity of material poisonous by inhalation (PIH), including anhydrous ammonia, as defined in §§ 171.8, 173.115 and 173.132 of this title;

(ii) Main line used for regularly provided intercity or commuter passenger service, except as provided in § 236.1019; and

(iii) Additional line of railroad as required by the applicable FRA approved PTCIP, this subpart, or an FRA order requiring installation of a PTC system by that date.

(2) Initial baseline identification of lines.  For the purposes of paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section, the baseline information necessary to determine whether a Class I railroad's track segment shall be equipped with a PTC system shall be determined and reported as follows:

(i) The traffic density threshold of 5 million gross tons shall be based upon calendar year 2008 gross tonnage, except to the extent that traffic may fall below 5 million gross tons for two consecutive calendar years and a PTCIP or an RFA reflecting this change is filed and approved under paragraph (b)(4) of this section and, if applicable, § 236.1021.

(ii) The presence or absence of any quantity of PIH hazardous materials shall be determined by whether one or more cars containing such product(s) was transported over the track segment in calendar year 2008 or prior to the filing of the PTCIP, except to the extent that the PTCIP or RFA justifies, under paragraph (b)(4) of this section, removal of the subject track segment from the PTCIP listing of lines to be equipped.

(3) Addition of track segments.  To the extent increases in freight rail traffic occur subsequent to calendar year 2008 that might affect the requirement to install a PTC system on any line not yet equipped, the railroad shall seek to amend its PTCIP by promptly filing an RFA in accordance with § 236.1021. The following criteria apply:

(i) If rail traffic exceeds 5 million gross tons in any year after 2008, the tonnage shall be calculated for the preceding two calendar years and if the total tonnage for those two calendar years exceeds 10 million gross tons, a PTCIP or its amendment is required.

(ii) If PIH traffic is carried on a track segment as a result of a request for rail service or rerouting warranted under part 172 of this title, and if the line carries in excess of 5 million gross tons of rail traffic as determined under this paragraph, a PTCIP or its amendment is required. This does not apply when temporary rerouting is authorized in accordance with paragraph (g) of this section.

(iii) Once a railroad is notified by FRA that its RFA filed in accordance with this paragraph has been approved, the railroad shall equip the line with the applicable PTC system by December 31, 2015, or within 24 months, whichever is later.

(4) Exclusion or removal of track segments from PTC baseline —(i) Routing changes.  In a PTCIP or an RFA, a railroad may request review of the requirement to install PTC on a track segment where a PTC system is otherwise required by this section, but has not yet been installed, based upon changes in rail traffic such as reductions in total traffic volume to a level below 5 million gross tons annually, cessation of passenger service or the approval of an MTEA, or the cessation of PIH materials traffic. Any such request shall be accompanied by estimated traffic projections for the next 5 years (e.g., as a result of planned rerouting, coordinations, or location of new business on the line).

(ii) FRA will approve the exclusion requested pursuant to paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section if the railroad establishes that, as of December 31, 2015:

(A) No passenger service will be present on the involved track segment or the passenger service will be subject to an MTEA approved in accordance with 49 CFR 236.1019; and

(B) No PIH traffic will be present on the involved track segment or the gross tonnage on the involved track segment will decline to below 5 million gross tons annually as computed over a 2-year period.

(iii) Freight lines with de minimis risk not used for regularly provided intercity or commuter rail passenger service. (A) In a PTCIP or an RFA, a railroad may request review of the requirement to install a PTC system on a track segment where a PTC system is otherwise required by this section, but has not yet been installed, based upon the presence of a minimal quantity of PIH materials traffic. Any such request shall be accompanied by estimated traffic projections for the next 5 years (e.g., as a result of planned rerouting, coordination, or location of new business on the line). Where the request involves prior or planned rerouting of PIH materials traffic, the railroad must provide the information and analysis identified in paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section. The submission shall also include a full description of potential safety hazards on the segment of track and fully describe train operations over the line. This paragraph does not apply to line segments used for commuter rail or intercity rail passenger service.

(B) Absent special circumstances related to specific hazards presented by operations on the line segment, FRA will approve a request for relief under this paragraph for a rail line segment that meets all of the following criteria:

(1) That carries less than 15 million gross tons annually;

(2) That does not have a heavy grade as “heavy grade” is defined in § 232.407 of this chapter for any train operating over the track segment;

(3) Where the railroad adopts and complies with an operating rule requiring the crew of any train approaching working limits established under part 214 of this chapter to notify the roadway worker in charge of the train's approach at least 2 miles in advance of the working limits or, if the train crew does not have advance knowledge of the working limits, as soon as practical;

(4) That carries fewer than 100 cars containing PIH materials per year, excluding those cars containing only a residue, as defined in § 171.8 of this title, of PIH materials;

(5) That carries 2 or fewer trains per day carrying any quantity of PIH materials;

(6) Where trains carrying any quantity of PIH materials operate at speeds not to exceed 40 miles per hour; and

(7) Where any train transporting a car containing any quantity of PIH materials is operated with a vacant block ahead of and behind the train.

(C) FRA may, in its discretion, approve other track segments not used for regularly provided intercity or commuter passenger service that have posed an equivalent or lesser level of risk of a PTC-preventable accident or PIH materials release as those track segments covered by paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(B) of this section, where such other track segments are similar to those covered by paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(B) of this section.

(D) Failure to submit sufficient information will result in the denial of any request under this paragraph (b)(4)(ii). If the request is granted, on and after the date the line would have otherwise been required to be equipped under the schedule contained in the PTCIP and approved by FRA, operations on the line shall be conducted in accordance with any conditions attached to the grant, including implementation of proposed mitigations as applicable.

(5) Line sales.  FRA does not approve removal of a line from the PTCIP exclusively based upon a representation that a track segment will be abandoned or sold to another railroad. In the event a track segment is approved for abandonment or transfer by the Surface Transportation Board, FRA will review at the request of the transferring and acquiring railroads whether the requirement to install PTC on the line should be removed given all of the circumstances, including expected traffic and hazardous materials levels, reservation of trackage or haulage rights by the transferring railroad, routing analysis under part 172 of this chapter, commercial and real property arrangements affecting the transferring and acquiring railroads post-transfer, and such other factors as may be relevant to continue safe operations on the line. If FRA denies the request, the acquiring railroad shall install the PTC system on the schedule provided in the transferring railroad's PTCIP, without regard to whether it is a Class I railroad.

(6) New rail passenger service.  No new intercity or commuter rail passenger service shall commence after December 31, 2020, until a PTC system certified under this subpart has been installed and made operative.

(7) Implementation deadlines. (i) Each railroad must complete full implementation of its PTC system by December 31, 2018.

(ii) A railroad is excepted from paragraph (b)(7)(i) of this section and must complete full implementation of its PTC system by December 31, 2020, or the date specified in its approved alternative schedule and sequence, whichever is earlier, only if the railroad:

(A) Installs all PTC hardware and acquires all spectrum necessary to implement its PTC system by December 31, 2018;

(B) Submits an alternative schedule and sequence providing for implementation of positive train control system as soon as practicable, but not later than December 31, 2020;

(C) Notifies the Associate Administrator in writing that it is prepared for review of its alternative schedule and sequence under 49 U.S.C. 20157(a)(3)(B); and

(D) Receives FRA approval of its alternative schedule and sequence.

(iii) If a railroad meets the criteria in paragraph (b)(7)(ii) of this section, the railroad must adhere to its approved alternative schedule and sequence and any of its subsequently approved amendments or required modifications.

(c) Hazard detectors. (1) All hazard detectors integrated into a signal or train control system on or after October 16, 2008, shall be integrated into PTC systems required by this subpart; and their warnings shall be appropriately and timely enforced as described in the applicable PTCSP.

(2) The applicable PTCSP must provide for receipt and presentation to the locomotive engineer and other train crew members of warnings from any additional hazard detectors using the PTC data network, onboard displays, and audible alerts. If the PTCSP so provides, the action to be taken by the system and by the crew members shall be specified.

(3) The PTCDP (as applicable) and PTCSP for any new service described in § 236.1007 to be conducted above 90 miles per hour shall include a hazard analysis describing the hazards relevant to the specific route(s) in question (e.g., potential for track obstruction due to events such as falling rock or undermining of the track structure due to high water or displacement of a bridge over navigable waters), the basis for decisions concerning hazard detectors provided, and the manner in which such additional hazard detectors will be interfaced with the PTC system.

(d) Event recorders. (1) Each lead locomotive, as defined in part 229, of a train equipped and operating with a PTC system required by this subpart must be equipped with an operative event recorder, which shall:

(i) Record safety-critical train control data routed to the locomotive engineer's display that the engineer is required to comply with;

(ii) Specifically include text messages conveying mandatory directives, maximum authorized speeds, PTC system brake warnings, PTC system brake enforcements, and the state of the PTC system (e.g., cut in, cut out, active, or failed); and

(iii) Include examples of how the captured data will be displayed during playback along with the format, content, and data retention duration requirements specified in the PTCSP submitted and approved pursuant to this paragraph. If such train control data can be calibrated against other data required by this part, it may, at the election of the railroad, be retained in a separate memory module.

(2) Each lead locomotive, as defined in part 229, manufactured and in service after October 1, 2009, that is equipped and operating with a PTC system required by this subpart, shall be equipped with an event recorder memory module meeting the crash hardening requirements of § 229.135 of this chapter.

(3) Nothing in this subpart excepts compliance with any of the event recorder requirements contained in § 229.135 of this chapter.

(e) Switch position.  The following requirements apply with respect to determining proper switch position under this section. When a main line switch position is unknown or improperly aligned for a train's route in advance of the train's movement, the PTC system will provide warning of the condition associated with the following enforcement:

(1) A PTC system shall enforce restricted speed over any switch:

(i) Where train movements are made with the benefit of the indications of a wayside or cab signal system or other similar appliance, method, device, or system of equivalent safety proposed to FRA and approved by the Associate Administrator in accordance with this part; and

(ii) Where wayside or cab signal system or other similar appliance, method, device, or system of equivalent safety, requires the train to be operated at restricted speed.

(2) A PTC system shall enforce a positive stop short of any main line switch, and any switch on a siding where the allowable speed is in excess of 20 miles per hour, if movement of the train over the switch:

(i) Is made without the benefit of the indications of a wayside or cab signal system or other similar appliance, method, device, or system of equivalent safety proposed to FRA and approved by the Associate Administrator in accordance with this part; or

(ii) Would create an unacceptable risk. Unacceptable risk includes conditions when traversing the switch, even at low speeds, could result in direct conflict with the movement of another train (including a hand-operated crossover between main tracks, a hand-operated crossover between a main track and an adjoining siding or auxiliary track, or a hand-operated switch providing access to another subdivision or branch line, etc.).

(3) A PTC system required by this subpart shall be designed, installed, and maintained to perform the switch position detection and enforcement described in paragraphs (e)(1) and (e)(2) of this section, except as provided for and justified in the applicable, FRA approved PTCDP or PTCSP.

(4) The control circuit or electronic equivalent for all movement authorities over any switches, movable-point frogs, or derails shall be selected through circuit controller or functionally equivalent device operated directly by the switch points, derail, or by switch locking mechanism, or through relay or electronic device controlled by such circuit controller or functionally equivalent device, for each switch, movable-point frog, or derail in the route governed. Circuits or electronic equivalent shall be arranged so that any movement authorities less restrictive than those prescribed in paragraphs (e)(1) and (e)(2) of this section can only be provided when each switch, movable-point frog, or derail in the route governed is in proper position, and shall be in accordance with subparts A through G of this part, unless it is otherwise provided in a PTCSP approved under this subpart.

(f) Train-to-train collision.  A PTC system shall be considered to be configured to prevent train-to-train collisions within the meaning of paragraph (a) of this section if trains are required to be operated at restricted speed and if the onboard PTC equipment enforces the upper limits of the railroad's restricted speed rule (15 or 20 miles per hour). This application applies to:

(1) Operating conditions under which trains are required by signal indication or operating rule to:

(i) Stop before continuing; or

(ii) Reduce speed to restricted speed and continue at restricted speed until encountering a more favorable indication or as provided by operating rule.

(2) Operation of trains within the limits of a joint mandatory directive.

(g) Temporary rerouting.  A train equipped with a PTC system as required by this subpart may be temporarily rerouted onto a track not equipped with a PTC system and a train not equipped with a PTC system may be temporarily rerouted onto a track equipped with a PTC system as required by this subpart in the following circumstances:

(1) Emergencies.  In the event of an emergency—including conditions such as derailment, flood, fire, tornado, hurricane, earthquake, or other similar circumstance outside of the railroad's control—that would prevent usage of the regularly used track if:

(i) The rerouting is applicable only until the emergency condition ceases to exist and for no more than 14 consecutive calendar days, unless otherwise extended by approval of the Associate Administrator;

(ii) The railroad provides written or telephonic notification to the applicable Regional Administrator of the information listed in paragraph (i) of this section within one business day of the beginning of the rerouting made in accordance with this paragraph; and

(iii) The conditions contained in paragraph (j) of this section are followed.

(2) Planned maintenance.  In the event of planned maintenance that would prevent usage of the regularly used track if:

(i) The maintenance period does not exceed 30 days;

(ii) A request is filed with the applicable Regional Administrator in accordance with paragraph (i) of this section no less than 10 business days prior to the planned rerouting; and

(iii) The conditions contained in paragraph (j) of this section are followed.

(h) Rerouting requests. (1) For the purposes of paragraph (g)(2) of this section, the rerouting request shall be self-executing unless the applicable Regional Administrator responds with a notice disapproving of the rerouting or providing instructions to allow rerouting. Such instructions may include providing additional information to the Regional Administrator or Associate Administrator prior to the commencement of rerouting. Once the Regional Administrator responds with a notice under this paragraph, no rerouting may occur until the Regional Administrator or Associate Administrator provides his or her approval.

(2) In the event the temporary rerouting described in paragraph (g)(2) of this section is to exceed 30 consecutive calendar days:

(i) The railroad shall provide a request in accordance with paragraphs (i) and (j) of this section with the Associate Administrator no less than 10 business days prior to the planned rerouting; and

(ii) The rerouting shall not commence until receipt of approval from the Associate Administrator.

(i) Content of rerouting request.  Each notice or request referenced in paragraph (g) and (h) of this section must indicate:

(1) The dates that such temporary rerouting will occur;

(2) The number and types of trains that will be rerouted;

(3) The location of the affected tracks; and

(4) A description of the necessity for the temporary rerouting.

(j) Rerouting conditions.  Rerouting of operations under paragraph (g) of this section may occur under the following conditions:

(1) Where a train not equipped with a PTC system is rerouted onto a track equipped with a PTC system, or a train not equipped with a PTC system that is compatible and functionally responsive to the PTC system utilized on the line to which the train is being rerouted, the train shall be operated in accordance with § 236.1029; or

(2) Where any train is rerouted onto a track not equipped with a PTC system, the train shall be operated in accordance with the operating rules applicable to the line on which the train is rerouted.

(k) Rerouting cessation.  The applicable Regional Administrator may order a railroad to cease any rerouting provided under paragraph (g) or (h) of this section.

[75 FR 2699, Jan. 15, 2010, as amended at 75 FR 59117, Sept. 27, 2010; 77 FR 28305, May 14, 2012; 79 FR 49716, Aug. 22, 2014; 81 FR 10128, Feb. 29, 2016]

§ 236.1006 Equipping locomotives operating in PTC territory.

(a) General.  Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, each locomotive, locomotive consist, or train on any track segment equipped with a PTC system shall be controlled by a locomotive equipped with an onboard PTC apparatus that is fully operative and functioning in accordance with the applicable PTCSP approved under this subpart.

(b) Exceptions. (1) Each railroad required to install PTC shall include in its PTCIP specific goals for progressive implementation of onboard systems and deployment of PTC-equipped locomotives such that the safety benefits of PTC are achieved through incremental growth in the percentage of controlling locomotives operating on PTC lines that are equipped with operative PTC onboard equipment. The PTCIP shall include a brief but sufficient explanation of how those goals will be achieved, including assignment of responsibilities within the organization. The goals shall be expressed as the percentage of trains operating on PTC-equipped lines that are equipped with operative onboard PTC apparatus responsive to the wayside, expressed as an annualized (calendar year) percentage for the railroad as a whole.

(2) [Reserved]

(3) A train controlled by a locomotive with an onboard PTC apparatus that has failed en route is permitted to operate in accordance with 49 U.S.C. 20157(j) or § 236.1029, as applicable.

(4) A train operated by a Class II or Class III railroad, including a tourist or excursion railroad, and controlled by a locomotive not equipped with an onboard PTC apparatus is permitted to operate on a PTC-operated track segment:

(i) That either:

(A) Has no regularly scheduled intercity or commuter passenger rail traffic; or

(B) Has regularly scheduled intercity or commuter passenger rail traffic and the applicable PTCIP permits the operation of a train operated by a Class II or III railroad and controlled by a locomotive not equipped with an onboard PTC apparatus;

(ii) Where operations are restricted to four or less such unequipped trains per day, whereas a train conducting a “turn” operation (e.g., moving to a point of interchange to drop off or pick up cars and returning to the track owned by a Class II or III railroad) is considered two trains for this purpose; and

(iii) Where each movement shall either:

(A) Not exceed 20 miles in length; or

(B) To the extent any movement exceeds 20 miles in length, such movement is not permitted without the controlling locomotive being equipped with an onboard PTC system after December 31, 2023, and each applicable Class II or III railroad shall report to FRA its progress in equipping each necessary locomotive with an onboard PTC apparatus to facilitate continuation of the movement. The progress reports shall be filed not later than December 31, 2020 and, if all necessary locomotives are not yet equipped, on December 31, 2022.

(5) Freight yard movements.  For the purpose of freight switching service or freight transfer train service, a locomotive, locomotive consist, or train may operate without onboard PTC apparatus installed or operational where an onboard PTC apparatus is otherwise required by this part only if all of the following six requirements and conditions are met:

(i) The locomotive, locomotive consist, or train must be engaged in freight switching service or freight transfer train service, including yard, local, industrial, and hostling service, movements in connection with the assembling or disassembling of trains, and work trains;

(ii) The movement must originate either:

(A) In a yard; or

(B) Within 20 miles of a yard with the yard as the final destination point;

(iii) The locomotive, locomotive consist, or train shall not travel to a point in excess of 20 miles from its point of entry onto the PTC-equipped main line track;

(iv) The speed of the locomotive, locomotive consist, or train shall not exceed restricted speed, except if:

(A) No other locomotive, locomotive consist, or train is operating on any part of the route without an operational onboard PTC apparatus;

(B) No working limits are established under part 214 of this chapter on any part of the route; and

(C) Either an air brake test under part 232 of this chapter is performed, in which case the locomotive, locomotive consist, or train may proceed at a speed not to exceed 30 miles per hour; or an air brake test under part 232 of this chapter is not performed, in which case the locomotive, locomotive consist, or train may proceed at a speed not to exceed 20 miles per hour;

(v) The speed of the locomotive, locomotive consist, or train shall not exceed restricted speed on PTC-equipped track where the route terminates; and

(vi) The route of the locomotive or train is protected against conflicting operations by the PTC system and sufficient operating rules to protect against train-to-train collisions, as specified in the PTCSP.

(vii) FRA may, in its discretion, approve yard movement procedures other than the yard movement procedures in paragraphs (b)(5)(i) through (b)(5)(vi) of this section in a PTCSP or an RFA that provide an equivalent or greater level of safety as the requirements of paragraphs (b)(5)(i) through (b)(5)(vi) of this section, where such procedures are similar to those of paragraphs (b)(5)(i) through (b)(5)(vi) of this section.

(viii) A locomotive, locomotive consist, or train with an operative onboard PTC apparatus may assist a locomotive, locomotive consist, or train operating without an operative onboard PTC apparatus for purposes such as locomotive malfunction, rescue of locomotive or cars, or to add or remove power, provided that such a movement is made at restricted speed.

(c) When a train movement is conducted under the exceptions described in paragraph (b)(4) of this section, that movement shall be made in accordance with § 236.1029.

(d) Onboard PTC apparatus. (1) The onboard PTC apparatus shall be so arranged that each member of the crew assigned to perform duties in the locomotive can receive the same PTC information displayed in the same manner and execute any functions necessary to that crew member's duties. The locomotive engineer shall not be required to perform functions related to the PTC system while the train is moving that have the potential to distract the locomotive engineer from performance of other safety-critical duties.

(2) The onboard PTC apparatus may be distributed among multiple locomotives if such functionality is included with the applicable PTCSP approved under this subpart. The controlling locomotive shall be equipped with a fully operative interface that complies with paragraph (d)(1) of this section and is consistent with appendix E of this part.

[75 FR 2699, Jan. 15, 2010, as amended at 79 FR 49716, Aug. 22, 2014; 81 FR 10129, Feb. 29, 2016]

§ 236.1007 Additional requirements for high-speed service.

(a) A PTC railroad that conducts a passenger operation at or greater than 60 miles per hour or a freight operation at or greater than 50 miles per hour shall have installed a PTC system including or working in concert with technology that includes all of the safety-critical functional attributes of a block signal system meeting the requirements of this part, including appropriate fouling circuits and broken rail detection (or equivalent safeguards).

(b) In addition to the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section, a host railroad that conducts a freight or passenger operation at more than 90 miles per hour shall:

(1) Have an approved PTCSP establishing that the system was designed and will be operated to meet the fail-safe operation criteria described in Appendix C to this part; and

(2) Prevent unauthorized or unintended entry onto the main line from any track not equipped with a PTC system compliant with this subpart by placement of split-point derails or equivalent means integrated into the PTC system; and

(3) Comply with § 236.1029(c).

(c) In addition to the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, a host railroad that conducts a freight or passenger operation at more than 125 miles per hour shall have an approved PTCSP accompanied by a document (“HSR-125”) establishing that the system:

(1) Will be operated at a level of safety comparable to that achieved over the 5 year period prior to the submission of the PTCSP by other train control systems that perform PTC functions required by this subpart, and which have been utilized on high-speed rail systems with similar technical and operational characteristics in the United States or in foreign service, provided that the use of foreign service data must be approved by the Associate Administrator before submittal of the PTCSP; and

(2) Has been designed to detect incursions into the right-of-way, including incidents involving motor vehicles diverting from adjacent roads and bridges, where conditions warrant.

(d) A railroad providing existing high-speed passenger service may request in its PTCSP that the Associate Administrator excuse compliance with one or more requirements of this section upon a showing that the subject service has been conducted with a high level of safety.

[75 FR 2699, Jan. 15, 2010, as amended at 83 FR 59218, Nov. 21, 2018]

§ 236.1009 Procedural requirements.

(a) PTC Implementation Plan (PTCIP). (1) By April 16, 2010, each host railroad that is required to implement and operate a PTC system in accordance with § 236.1005(b) shall develop and submit in accordance with § 236.1011(a) a PTCIP for implementing a PTC system required under § 236.1005. Filing of the PTCIP shall not exempt the required filings of an NPI, PTCSP, PTCDP, or Type Approval.

(2) After April 16, 2010, a host railroad shall file:

(i) A PTCIP if it becomes a host railroad of a main line track segment for which it is required to implement and operate a PTC system in accordance with § 236.1005(b); or

(ii) A request for amendment (“RFA”) of its current and approved PTCIP in accordance with § 236.1021 if it intends to:

(A) Initiate a new category of service (i.e., passenger or freight); or

(B) Add, subtract, or otherwise materially modify one or more lines of railroad for which installation of a PTC system is required.

(3) The host and tenant railroad(s) shall jointly file a PTCIP that addresses shared track:

(i) If the host railroad is required to install and operate a PTC system on a segment of its track; and

(ii) If the tenant railroad that shares the same track segment would have been required to install a PTC system if the host railroad had not otherwise been required to do so.

(4) If railroads required to file a joint PTCIP are unable to jointly file a PTCIP in accordance with paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(3) of this section, then each railroad shall:

(i) Separately file a PTCIP in accordance with paragraph (a)(1);

(ii) Notify the Associate Administrator that the subject railroads were unable to agree on a PTCIP to be jointly filed;

(iii) Provide the Associate Administrator with a comprehensive list of all issues not in agreement between the railroads that would prevent the subject railroads from jointly filing the PTCIP; and

(iv) Confer with the Associate Administrator to develop and submit a PTCIP mutually acceptable to all subject railroads.

(5) Each railroad filing a PTCIP shall report annually, by March 31 of each year, and until its PTC system implementation is complete, its progress towards fulfilling the goals outlined in its PTCIP under this part, including progress towards PTC system installation pursuant to § 236.1005 and onboard PTC apparatus installation and use in PTC-equipped track segments pursuant to § 236.1006, as well as impediments to completion of each of the goals.

(b) Type Approval.  Each host railroad, individually or jointly with others such as a tenant railroad or system supplier, shall file prior to or simultaneously with the filing made in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section:

(1) An unmodified Type Approval previously issued by the Associate Administrator in accordance with § 236.1013 or § 236.1031(b) with its associated docket number;

(2) A PTCDP requesting a Type Approval for:

(i) A PTC system that does not have a Type Approval; or

(ii) A PTC system with a previously issued Type Approval that requires one or more variances;

(3) A PTCSP subject to the conditions set forth in paragraph (c) of this section, with or without a Type Approval; or

(4) A document attesting that a Type Approval is not necessary since the host railroad has no territory for which a PTC system is required under this subpart.

(c) Notice of Product Intent (NPI).  A railroad may, in lieu of submitting a PTCDP, or referencing an already issued Type Approval, submit an NPI describing the functions of the proposed PTC system. If a railroad elects to file an NPI in lieu of a PTCDP or referencing an existing Type Approval with the PTCIP, and the PTCIP is otherwise acceptable to the Associate Administrator, the Associate Administrator may grant provisional approval of the PTCIP.

(1) A provisional approval of a PTCIP, unless otherwise extended by the Associate Administrator, is valid for a period of 270 days from the date of approval by the Associate Administrator.

(2) The railroad must submit an updated PTCIP with either a complete PTCDP as defined in § 236.1013(a), an updated PTCIP referencing an already approved Type Approval, or a full PTCSP within 270 days after the “Provisional Approval.”

(i) Within 90 days of receipt of an updated PTCIP that was submitted with an NPI, the Associate Administrator will approve or disapprove of the updated PTCIP and notify in writing the affected railroad. If the updated PTCIP is not approved, the notification will include the plan's deficiencies. Within 30 days of receipt of that notification, the railroad or other entity that submitted the plan shall correct all deficiencies and resubmit the plan in accordance with this section and § 236.1011, as applicable.

(ii) If an update to a “Provisionally Approved” PTCIP is not received by the Associate Administrator by the end of the period indicated in this paragraph, the “Provisional Approval” given to the PTCIP is automatically revoked. The revocation is retroactive to the date the original PTCIP and NPI were first submitted to the Associate Administrator.

(d) PTCSP and PTC System Certification.  The following apply to each PTCSP and PTC System Certification.

(1) A PTC System Certification for a PTC system may be obtained by submitting an acceptable PTCSP. If the PTC system is the subject of a Type Approval, the safety case elements contained in the PTCDP may be incorporated by reference into the PTCSP, subject to finalization of the human factors analysis contained in the PTCDP.

(2) Each PTCSP requirement under § 236.1015 shall be supported by information and analysis sufficient to establish that the requirements of this subpart have been satisfied.

(3) If the Associate Administrator finds that the PTCSP and supporting documentation support a finding that the system complies with this part, the Associate Administrator may approve the PTCSP. If the Associate Administrator approves the PTCSP, the railroad shall receive PTC System Certification for the subject PTC system and shall implement the PTC system according to the PTCSP.

(4) A required PTC system shall not:

(i) Be used in service until it receives from FRA a PTC System Certification; and

(ii) Receive a PTC System Certification unless FRA receives and approves an applicable:

(A) PTCSP; or

(B) Request for Expedited Certification (REC) as defined by § 236.1031(a).

(e) Plan contents. (1) No PTCIP shall receive approval unless it complies with § 236.1011. No railroad shall receive a Type Approval or PTC System Certification unless the applicable PTCDP or PTCSP, respectively, comply with §§ 236.1013 and 236.1015, respectively.

(2) All materials filed in accordance with this subpart must be in the English language, or have been translated into English and attested as true and correct.

(3) Each filing referenced in this section may include a request for full or partial confidentiality in accordance with § 209.11 of this chapter. If confidentiality is requested as to a portion of any applicable document, then in addition to the filing requirements under § 209.11 of this chapter, the person filing the document shall also file a copy of the original unredacted document, marked to indicate which portions are redacted in the document's confidential version without obscuring the original document's contents.

(f) Supporting documentation and information. (1) Issuance of a Type Approval or PTC System Certification is contingent upon FRA's confidence in the implementation and operation of the subject PTC system. This confidence may be based on FRA-monitored field testing or an independent assessment performed in accordance with § 236.1035 or § 236.1017, respectively.

(2) Upon request by FRA, the railroad requesting a Type Approval or PTC System Certification must engage in field testing or independent assessment performed in accordance with § 236.1035 or § 236.1017, respectively, to support the assertions made in any of the plans submitted under this subpart. These assertions include any of the plans' content requirements under this subpart.

(g) FRA conditions, reconsiderations, and modifications. (1) As necessary to ensure safety, FRA may attach special conditions to approving a PTCIP or issuing a Type Approval or PTC System Certification.

(2) After granting a Type Approval or PTC System Certification, FRA may reconsider the Type Approval or PTC System Certification upon revelation of any of the following factors concerning the contents of the PTCDP or PTCSP:

(i) Potential error or fraud;

(ii) Potentially invalidated assumptions determined as a result of in-service experience or one or more unsafe events calling into question the safety analysis supporting the approval.

(3) During FRA's reconsideration in accordance with this paragraph, the PTC system may remain in use if otherwise consistent with the applicable law and regulations and FRA may impose special conditions for use of the PTC system.

(4) After FRA's reconsideration in accordance with this paragraph, FRA may:

(i) Dismiss its reconsideration and continue to recognize the existing FRA approved Type Approval or PTC System Certification;

(ii) Allow continued operations under such conditions the Associate Administrator deems necessary to ensure safety; or

(iii) Revoke the Type Approval or PTC System Certification and direct the railroad to cease operations where PTC systems are required under this subpart.

(h) FRA access.  The Associate Administrator, or that person's designated representatives, shall be afforded reasonable access to monitor, test, and inspect processes, procedures, facilities, documents, records, design and testing materials, artifacts, training materials and programs, and any other information used in the design, development, manufacture, test, implementation, and operation of the system, as well as interview any personnel:

(1) Associated with a PTC system for which a Type Approval or PTC System Certification has been requested or provided; or

(2) To determine whether a railroad has been in compliance with this subpart.

(i) Foreign regulatory entity verification.  Information that has been certified under the auspices of a foreign regulatory entity recognized by the Associate Administrator may, at the Associate Administrator's sole discretion, be accepted as independently Verified and Validated and used to support each railroad's development of the PTCSP.

(j) Processing times for PTCDP and PTCSP. 

(1) Within 30 days of receipt of a PTCDP or PTCSP, the Associate Administrator will either acknowledge receipt or acknowledge receipt and request more information.

(2) To the extent practicable, considering the scope, complexity, and novelty of the product or change:

(i) FRA will approve, approve with conditions, or deny the PTCDP within 60 days of the date on which the PTCDP was filed;

(ii) FRA will approve, approve with conditions, or deny the PTCSP within 180 days of the date on which the PTCSP was filed;

(iii) If FRA has not approved, approved with conditions, or denied the PTCDP or PTCSP within the 60-day or 180-day window, as applicable, FRA will provide the submitting party with a statement of reasons as to why the submission has not yet been acted upon and a projected deadline by which an approval or denial will be issued and any further consultations or inquiries will be resolved.

[75 FR 2699, Jan. 15, 2010, as amended at 79 FR 49717, Aug. 22, 2014; 81 FR 10129, Feb. 29, 2016]

§ 236.1011 PTC Implementation Plan content requirements.

(a) Contents.  A PTCIP filed pursuant to this subpart shall, at a minimum, describe:

(1) The functional requirements that the proposed system must meet;

(2) How the PTC railroad intends to comply with §§ 236.1009(c) and (d);

(3) How the PTC system will provide for interoperability of the system between the host and all tenant railroads on the track segments required to be equipped with PTC systems under this subpart and:

(i) Include relevant provisions of agreements, executed by all applicable railroads, in place to achieve interoperability;

(ii) List all methods used to obtain interoperability; and

(iii) Identify any railroads with respect to which interoperability agreements have not been achieved as of the time the plan is filed, the practical obstacles that were encountered that prevented resolution, and the further steps planned to overcome those obstacles;

(4) How, to the extent practical, the PTC system will be implemented to address areas of greater risk to the public and railroad employees before areas of lesser risk;

(5) The sequence and schedule in which track segments will be equipped and the basis for those decisions, and shall at a minimum address the following risk factors by track segment:

(i) Segment traffic characteristics such as typical annual passenger and freight train volume and volume of poison- or toxic-by-inhalation (PIH or TIH) shipments (loads, residue);

(ii) Segment operational characteristics such as current method of operation (including presence or absence of a block signal system), number of tracks, and maximum allowable train speeds, including planned modifications; and

(iii) Route attributes bearing on risk, including ruling grades and extreme curvature;

(6) The following information relating to rolling stock:

(i) What rolling stock will be equipped with PTC technology;

(ii) The schedule to equip that rolling stock by the applicable deadline under § 236.1005(b)(7);

(iii) All documents and information required by § 236.1006; and

(iv) Unless the tenant railroad is filing its own PTCIP, the host railroad's PTCIP shall:

(A) Attest that the host railroad has made a formal written request to each tenant railroad requesting identification of each item of rolling stock to be PTC system equipped and the date each will be equipped; and

(B) Include each tenant railroad's response to the host railroad's written request made in accordance with paragraph (a)(6)(iv)(A) of this section;

(7) The number of wayside devices required for each track segment and the installation schedule to complete wayside equipment installation by the applicable deadline under § 236.1005(b)(7);

(8) Identification of each track segment on the railroad as mainline or non-mainline track. If the PTCIP includes an MTEA, as defined by § 236.1019, the PTCIP should identify the tracks included in the MTEA as main line track with a reference to the MTEA;

(9) To the extent the railroad determines that risk-based prioritization required by paragraph (a)(4) of this section is not practical, the basis for this determination; and

(10) The dates the associated PTCDP and PTCSP, as applicable, will be submitted to FRA in accordance with § 236.1009.

(b) Additional Class I railroad PTCIP requirements.  Each Class I railroad shall include:

(1) In its PTCIP a strategy for full deployment of its PTC system, describing the criteria that it will apply in identifying additional rail lines on its own network, and rail lines of entities that it controls or engages in joint operations with, for which full or partial deployment of PTC technologies is appropriate, beyond those required to be equipped under this subpart. Such criteria shall include consideration of the policies established by 49 U.S.C. 20156 (railroad safety risk reduction program), and regulations issued thereunder, as well as non-safety business benefits that may accrue.

(2) In the Technology Implementation Plan of its Risk Reduction Program, when first required to be filed in accordance with 49 U.S.C. 20156 and any regulation promulgated thereunder, a specification of rail lines selected for full or partial deployment of PTC under the criteria identified in its PTCIP.

(3) Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to create an expectation or requirement that additional rail lines beyond those required to be equipped by this subpart must be equipped or that such lines will be equipped during the period of primary implementation ending on the applicable deadline under § 236.1005(b)(7).

(4) As used in this paragraph, “partial implementation” of a PTC system refers to use, pursuant to subpart H of this part, of technology embedded in PTC systems that does not employ all of the functionalities required by this subpart.

(c) FRA review.  Within 90 days of receipt of a PTCIP, the Associate Administrator will approve or disapprove of the plan and notify in writing the affected railroad or other entity. If the PTCIP is not approved, the notification will include the plan's deficiencies. Within 30 days of receipt of that notification, the railroad or other entity that submitted the plan shall correct all deficiencies and resubmit the plan in accordance with § 236.1009 and paragraph (a) of this section, as applicable.

(d) Subpart H.  A railroad that elects to install a PTC system when not required to do so may elect to proceed under this subpart or under subpart H of this part.

(e) Upon receipt of a PTCIP, NPI, PTCDP, or PTCSP, FRA posts on its public web site notice of receipt and reference to the public docket in which a copy of the filing has been placed. FRA may consider any public comment on each document to the extent practicable within the time allowed by law and without delaying implementation of PTC systems.

(f) The PTCIP shall be maintained to reflect the railroad's most recent PTC deployment plans until all PTC system deployments required under this subpart are complete.

[75 FR 2699, Jan. 15, 2010, as amended at 75 FR 59117, Sept. 27, 2010; 81 FR 10129, Feb. 29, 2016]

§ 236.1013 PTC Development Plan and Notice of Product Intent content requirements and Type Approval.

(a) For a PTC system to obtain a Type Approval from FRA, the PTCDP shall be filed in accordance with § 236.1009 and shall include:

(1) A complete description of the PTC system, including a list of all PTC system components and their physical relationships in the subsystem or system;

(2) A description of the railroad operation or categories of operations on which the PTC system is designed to be used, including train movement density (passenger, freight), operating speeds (including a thorough explanation of intended compliance with § 236.1007), track characteristics, and railroad operating rules;

(3) An operational concepts document, including a list with complete descriptions of all functions which the PTC system will perform to enhance or preserve safety;

(4) A document describing the manner in which the PTC system architecture satisfies safety requirements;

(5) A preliminary human factors analysis, including a complete description of all human-machine interfaces and the impact of interoperability requirements on the same;

(6) An analysis of the applicability to the PTC system of the requirements of subparts A through G of this part that may no longer apply or are satisfied by the PTC system using an alternative method, and a complete explanation of the manner in which those requirements are otherwise fulfilled;

(7) A prioritized service restoration and mitigation plan and a description of the necessary security measures for the system;

(8) A description of target safety levels (e.g., MTTHE for major subsystems as defined in subpart H of this part), including requirements for system availability and a description of all backup methods of operation and any critical assumptions associated with the target levels;

(9) A complete description of how the PTC system will enforce authorities and signal indications;

(10) A description of the deviation which may be proposed under § 236.1029(c), if applicable; and

(11) A complete description of how the PTC system will appropriately and timely enforce all integrated hazard detectors in accordance with § 236.1005(c)(3), if applicable.

(b) If the Associate Administrator finds that the system described in the PTCDP would satisfy the requirements for PTC systems under this subpart and that the applicant has made a reasonable showing that a system built to the stated requirements would achieve the level of safety mandated for such a system under § 236.1015, the Associate Administrator may grant a numbered Type Approval for the system.

(c) Each Type Approval shall be valid for a period of 5 years, subject to automatic and indefinite extension provided that at least one PTC System Certification using the subject PTC system has been issued within that period and not revoked.

(d) The Associate Administrator may prescribe special conditions, amendments, and restrictions to any Type Approval as necessary for safety.

(e) If submitted, an NPI must contain the following information:

(1) A description of the railroad operation or categories of operations on which the proposed PTC system is designed to be used, including train movement density (passenger, freight), operating speeds (including a thorough explanation of intended compliance with § 236.1007), track characteristics, and railroad operating rules;

(2) An operational concepts document, including a list with complete descriptions of all functions that the proposed PTC system will perform to enhance or preserve safety;

(3) A description of target safety levels (e.g., MTTHE for major subsystems as defined in subpart H of this part), including requirements for system availability and a description of all backup methods of operation and any critical assumptions associated with the target levels;

(4) A complete description of how the proposed PTC system will enforce authorities and signal indications; and

(5) A complete description of how the proposed PTC system will appropriately and timely enforce all integrated hazard detectors in accordance with § 236.1005(c)(3), if applicable.

§ 236.1015 PTC Safety Plan content requirements and PTC System Certification.

(a) Before placing a PTC system required under this part in service, the host railroad must submit to FRA a PTCSP and receive a PTC System Certification. If the Associate Administrator finds that the PTCSP and supporting documentation support a finding that the system complies with this part, the Associate Administrator approves the PTCSP and issues a PTC System Certification. Receipt of a PTC System Certification affirms that the PTC system has been reviewed and approved by FRA in accordance with, and meets the requirements of, this part.

(b) A PTCSP submitted under this subpart may reference and utilize in accordance with this subpart any Type Approval previously issued by the Associate Administrator to any railroad, provided that the railroad:

(1) Maintains a continually updated PTCPVL pursuant to § 236.1023;

(2) Shows that the supplier from which they are procuring the PTC system has established and can maintain a quality control system for PTC system design and manufacturing acceptable to the Associate Administrator. The quality control system must include the process for the product supplier or vendor to promptly and thoroughly report any safety-relevant failure and previously unidentified hazards to each railroad using the product; and

(3) Provides the applicable licensing information.

(c) A PTCSP submitted in accordance with this subpart shall:

(1) Include the FRA approved PTCDP or, if applicable, the FRA issued Type Approval;

(2) (i) Specifically and rigorously document each variance, including the significance of each variance between the PTC system and its applicable operating conditions as described in the applicable PTCDP from that as described in the PTCSP, and attest that there are no other such variances; or

(ii) Attest that there are no variances between the PTC system and its applicable operating conditions as described in the applicable PTCDP from that as described in the PTCSP; and

(3) Attest that the system was otherwise built in accordance with the applicable PTCDP and PTCSP and achieves the level of safety represented therein.

(d) A PTCSP shall include the same information required for a PTCDP under § 236.1013(a). If a PTCDP has been filed and approved prior to filing of the PTCSP, the PTCSP may incorporate the PTCDP by reference, with the exception that a final human factors analysis shall be provided. The PTCSP shall contain the following additional elements:

(1) A hazard log consisting of a comprehensive description of all safety-relevant hazards not previously addressed by the vendor or supplier to be addressed during the life-cycle of the PTC system, including maximum threshold limits for each hazard (for unidentified hazards, the threshold shall be exceeded at one occurrence);

(2) A description of the safety assurance concepts that are to be used for system development, including an explanation of the design principles and assumptions;

(3) A risk assessment of the as-built PTC system described;

(4) A hazard mitigation analysis, including a complete and comprehensive description of each hazard and the mitigation techniques used;

(5) A complete description of the safety assessment and Verification and Validation processes applied to the PTC system, their results, and whether these processes address the safety principles described in Appendix C to this part directly, using other safety criteria, or not at all;

(6) A complete description of the railroad's training plan for railroad and contractor employees and supervisors necessary to ensure safe and proper installation, implementation, operation, maintenance, repair, inspection, testing, and modification of the PTC system;

(7) A complete description of the specific procedures and test equipment necessary to ensure the safe and proper installation, implementation, operation, maintenance, repair, inspection, testing, and modification of the PTC system on the railroad and establish safety-critical hazards are appropriately mitigated. These procedures, including calibration requirements, shall be consistent with or explain deviations from the equipment manufacturer's recommendations;

(8) A complete description of any additional warning to be placed in the Operations and Maintenance Manual in the same manner specified in § 236.919 and all warning labels to be placed on equipment as necessary to ensure safety;

(9) A complete description of the configuration or revision control measures designed to ensure that the railroad or its contractor does not adversely affect the safety-functional requirements and that safety-critical hazard mitigation processes are not compromised as a result of any such change;

(10) A complete description of all initial implementation testing procedures necessary to establish that safety-functional requirements are met and safety-critical hazards are appropriately mitigated;

(11) A complete description of all post-implementation testing (validation) and monitoring procedures, including the intervals necessary to establish that safety-functional requirements, safety-critical hazard mitigation processes, and safety-critical tolerances are not compromised over time, through use, or after maintenance (adjustment, repair, or replacement) is performed;

(12) A complete description of each record necessary to ensure the safety of the system that is associated with periodic maintenance, inspections, tests, adjustments, repairs, or replacements, and the system's resulting conditions, including records of component failures resulting in safety-relevant hazards (see § 236.1037);

(13) A safety analysis to determine whether, when the system is in operation, any risk remains of an unintended incursion into a roadway work zone due to human error. If the analysis reveals any such risk, the PTCDP and PTCSP shall describe how that risk will be mitigated;

(14) A more detailed description of any alternative arrangements as already provided under § 236.1005(a)(1)(i).

(15) A complete description of how the PTC system will enforce authorities and signal indications, unless already completely provided for in the PTCDP;

(16) A description of how the PTCSP complies with § 236.1019(f), if applicable;

(17) A description of any deviation in operational requirements for en route failures as specified under § 236.1029(c), if applicable and unless already completely provided for in the PTCDP;

(18) A complete description of how the PTC system will appropriately and timely enforce all integrated hazard detectors in accordance with § 236.1005;

(19) An emergency and planned maintenance temporary rerouting plan indicating how operations on the subject PTC system will take advantage of the benefits provided under § 236.1005(g) through (k); and

(20) The documents and information required under §§ 236.1007 and 236.1033.

(21) A list of each location where a locomotive with a failed onboard PTC apparatus will be regularly be exchanged or repaired pursuant to § 236.1029(b)(6) and a list of each movement that could take place pursuant to § 236.1029(b)(6) if the movement potentially could exceed 500 miles.

(e) The following additional requirements apply to:

(1) Non-vital overlay.  A PTC system proposed as an overlay on the existing method of operation and not built in accordance with the safety assurance principles set forth in appendix C of this part must, to the satisfaction of the Associate Administrator, be shown to:

(i) Reliably execute the functions set forth in § 236.1005;

(ii) Obtain at least 80 percent reduction of the risk associated with accidents preventable by the functions set forth in § 236.1005, when all effects of the change associated with the PTC system are taken into account. The supporting risk assessment shall evaluate all intended changes in railroad operations coincident with the introduction of the new system; and

(iii) Maintain a level of safety for each subsequent system modification that is equal to or greater than the level of safety for the previous PTC systems.

(2) Vital overlay.  A PTC system proposed on a newly constructed track or as an overlay on the existing method of operation and built in accordance with the safety assurance principles set forth in appendix C of this part must, to the satisfaction of the Associate Administrator, be shown to:

(i) Reliably execute the functions set forth in § 236.1005; and

(ii) Have sufficient documentation to demonstrate that the PTC system, as built, fulfills the safety assurance principles set forth in appendix C of this part. The supporting risk assessment may be abbreviated as that term is used in subpart H of this part.

(3) Stand-alone.  A PTC system proposed on a newly constructed track, an existing track for which no signal system exists, as a replacement for an existing signal or train control system, or otherwise to replace or materially modify the existing method of operation, shall:

(i) Reliably execute the functions required by § 236.1005 and be demonstrated to do so to FRA's satisfaction; and

(ii) Have a PTCSP establishing, with a high degree of confidence, that the system will not introduce new hazards that have not been mitigated. The supporting risk assessment shall evaluate all intended changes in railroad operations in relation to the introduction of the new system and shall examine in detail the direct and indirect effects of all changes in the method of operations.

(4) Mixed systems.  If a PTC system combining overlay, stand-alone, vital, or non-vital characteristics is proposed, the railroad shall confer with the Associate Administrator regarding appropriate structuring of the safety case and analysis.

(f) When determining whether the PTCSP fulfills the requirements under paragraph (d) of this section, the Associate Administrator may consider all available evidence concerning the reliability and availability of the proposed system and any and all safety consequences of the proposed changes. In any case where the PTCSP lacks adequate data regarding safety impacts of the proposed changes, the Associate Administrator may request the necessary data from the applicant. If the requested data is not provided, the Associate Administrator may find that potential hazards could or will arise.

(g) If a PTCSP applies to a system designed to replace an existing certified PTC system, the PTCSP will be approved provided that the PTCSP establishes with a high degree of confidence that the new system will provide a level of safety not less than the level of safety provided by the system to be replaced.

(h) When reviewing the issue of the potential data errors (for example, errors arising from data supplied from other business systems needed to execute the braking algorithm, survey data needed for location determination, or mandatory directives issued through the computer-aided dispatching system), the PTCSP must include a careful identification of each of the risks and a discussion of each applicable mitigation. In an appropriate case, such as a case in which the residual risk after mitigation is substantial or the underlying method of operation will be significantly altered, the Associate Administrator may require submission of a quantitative risk assessment addressing these potential errors.

[75 FR 2699, Jan. 15, 2010, as amended at 79 FR 49717, Aug. 22, 2014]

§ 236.1017 Independent third party Verification and Validation.

(a) The PTCSP must be supported by an independent third-party assessment when the Associate Administrator concludes that it is necessary based upon the criteria set forth in § 236.913, with the exception that consideration of the methodology used in the risk assessment (§ 236.913(g)(2)(vii)) shall apply only to the extent that a comparative risk assessment was required. To the extent practicable, FRA makes this determination not later than review of the PTCIP and the accompanying PTCDP or PTCSP. If an independent assessment is required, the assessment may apply to the entire system or a designated portion of the system.

(b) If a PTC system is to undergo an independent assessment in accordance with this section, the host railroad may submit to the Associate Administrator a written request that FRA confirm whether a particular entity would be considered an independent third party pursuant to this section. The request should include supporting information identified in paragraph (c) of this section. FRA may request further information to make a determination or provide its determination in writing.

(c) As used in this section, “independent third party” means a technically competent entity responsible to and compensated by the railroad (or an association on behalf of one or more railroads) that is independent of the PTC system supplier and vendor. An entity that is owned or controlled by the supplier or vendor, that is under common ownership or control with the supplier or vendor, or that is otherwise involved in the development of the PTC system is not considered “independent” within the meaning of this section.

(d) The independent third-party assessment shall, at a minimum, consist of the activities and result in the production of documentation meeting the requirements of Appendix F to this part, unless excepted by this part or by FRA order or waiver.

(e) Information provided that has been certified under the auspices of a foreign railroad regulatory entity recognized by the Associate Administrator may, at the Associate Administrator's discretion, be accepted as having been independently verified.

§ 236.1019 Main line track exceptions.

(a) Scope and procedure.  This section pertains exclusively to exceptions from the rule that trackage over which scheduled intercity and commuter passenger service is provided is considered main line track requiring installation of a PTC system. One or more intercity or commuter passenger railroads, or freight railroads conducting joint passenger and freight operation over the same segment of track may file a main line track exclusion addendum (“MTEA”) to its PTCIP requesting to designate track as not main line subject to the conditions set forth in paragraphs (b) or (c) of this section. No track shall be designated as yard or terminal unless it is identified in an MTEA that is part of an FRA approved PTCIP.

(b) Passenger terminal exception.  FRA will consider an exception in the case of trackage used exclusively as yard or terminal tracks by or in support of regularly scheduled intercity or commuter passenger service where the MTEA describes in detail the physical boundaries of the trackage in question, its use and characteristics (including track and signal charts) and all of the following apply:

(1) The maximum authorized speed for all movements is not greater than 20 miles per hour, and that maximum is enforced by any available onboard PTC equipment within the confines of the yard or terminal;

(2) Interlocking rules are in effect prohibiting reverse movements other than on signal indications without dispatcher permission; and

(3) Either of the following conditions exists:

(i) No freight operations are permitted; or

(ii) Freight operations are permitted but no passengers will be aboard passenger trains within the defined limits.

(c) Limited operations exception.  FRA will consider an exception in the case of a track segment used for limited operations (operating in accordance with § 236.0 of this part) under one of the following sets of conditions:

(1) The trackage is used for limited operations by at least one passenger railroad subject to at least one of the following conditions:

(i) All trains are limited to restricted speed;

(ii) Temporal separation of passenger and other trains is maintained as provided in paragraph (e) of this section; or

(iii) Passenger service is operated under a risk mitigation plan submitted by all railroads involved in the joint operation and approved by FRA. The risk mitigation plan must be supported by a risk assessment establishing that the proposed mitigations will achieve a level of safety not less than the level of safety that would obtain if the operations were conducted under paragraph (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section.

(2) Passenger service is operated on a segment of track of a freight railroad that is not a Class I railroad on which less than 15 million gross tons of freight traffic is transported annually and on which one of the following conditions applies:

(i) If the segment is unsignaled and no more than four regularly scheduled passenger trains are operated during a calendar day, or

(ii) If the segment is signaled (e.g., equipped with a traffic control system, automatic block signal system, or cab signal system) and no more than 12 regularly scheduled passenger trains are operated during a calendar day.

(3) Not more than four passenger trains per day are operated on a segment of track of a Class I freight railroad on which less than 15 million gross tons of freight traffic is transported annually.

(d) A limited operations exception under paragraph (c) is subject to FRA review and approval. FRA may require a collision hazard analysis to identify hazards and may require that specific mitigations be undertaken. Operations under any such exception shall be conducted subject to the terms and conditions of the approval. Any main line track exclusion is subject to periodic review.

(e) Temporal separation.  As used in this section, temporal separation means that limited passenger and freight operations do not operate on any segment of shared track during the same period and also refers to the processes or physical arrangements, or both, in place to ensure that temporal separation is established and maintained at all times. The use of exclusive authorities under mandatory directives is not, by itself, sufficient to establish that temporal separation is achieved. Procedures to ensure temporal separation shall include verification checks between passenger and freight operations and effective physical means to positively ensure segregation of passenger and freight operations in accordance with this paragraph.

(f) PTCSP requirement.  No PTCSP—filed after the approval of a PTCIP with an MTEA—shall be approved by FRA unless it attests that no changes, except for those included in an FRA approved RFA, have been made to the information in the PTCIP and MTEA required by paragraph (b) or (c) of this section.

(g) Designation modifications.  If subsequent to approval of its PTCIP or PTCSP the railroad seeks to modify which track or tracks should be designated as main line or not main line, it shall request modification of its PTCIP or PTCSP, as applicable, in accordance with § 236.1021.

[75 FR 2699, Jan. 15, 2010, as amended at 75 FR 59117, Sept. 27, 2010]

§ 236.1020 [Reserved]

§ 236.1021 Discontinuances, material modifications, and amendments.

(a) No changes, as defined by this section, to a PTCIP or PTCDP may be made unless:

(1) The railroad files a request for amendment (RFA) to the applicable PTCIP or PTCDP with the Associate Administrator; and

(2) The Associate Administrator approves the RFA.

(b) After approval of an RFA in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section, the railroad shall immediately adopt and comply with the amendment.

(c) In lieu of a separate filing under part 235 of this chapter, a railroad may request approval of a discontinuance or material modification of a signal or train control system by filing an RFA to its PTCIP or PTCDP with the Associate Administrator.

(d) FRA will not approve an RFA to a PTCIP or PTCDP unless the request includes:

(1) The information listed in § 235.10 of this chapter and the railroad provides FRA upon request any additional information necessary to evaluate the RFA (see § 235.12), including:

(2) The proposed modifications;

(3) The reasons for each modification;

(4) The changes to the PTCIP or PTCDP, as applicable;

(5) Each modification's effect on PTC system safety;

(6) An approximate timetable for filing of the PTCDP, PTCSP, or both, if the amendment pertains to a PTCIP; and

(e) If the RFA includes a request for approval of a discontinuance or material modification of a signal or train control system, FRA will publish a notice in the Federal Register of the application and will invite public comment in accordance with part 211 of this chapter.

(f) When considering the RFA, FRA will review the issue of the discontinuance or material modification and determine whether granting the request is in the public interest and consistent with railroad safety, taking into consideration all changes in the method of operation and system functionalities, both within normal PTC system availability and in the case of a system failed state (unavailable), contemplated in conjunction with installation of the PTC system. The railroad submitting the RFA must, at FRA's request, perform field testing in accordance with § 236.1035 or engage in Verification and Validation in accordance with § 236.1017.

(g) FRA may issue at its discretion a new Type Approval number for a PTC system modified under this section.

(h) Changes requiring filing of an RFA.  Except as provided by paragraph (i), an RFA shall be filed to request the following:

(1) Discontinuance of a PTC system, or other similar appliance or device;

(2) Decrease of the PTC system's limits (e.g., exclusion or removal of a PTC system on a track segment);

(3) Modification of a safety critical element of a PTC system; or

(4) Modification of a PTC system that affects the safety critical functionality of any other PTC system with which it interoperates.

(i) Discontinuances not requiring the filing of an RFA.  It is not necessary to file an RFA for the following discontinuances:

(1) Removal of a PTC system from track approved for abandonment by formal proceeding;

(2) Removal of PTC devices used to provide protection against unusual contingencies such as landslide, burned bridge, high water, high and wide load, or tunnel protection when the unusual contingency no longer exists;

(3) Removal of the PTC devices that are used on a movable bridge that has been permanently closed by the formal approval of another government agency and is mechanically secured in the closed position for rail traffic; or

(4) Removal of the PTC system from service for a period not to exceed 6 months that is necessitated by catastrophic occurrence such as derailment, flood, fire, or hurricane, or earthquake.

(j) Changes not requiring the filing of an RFA.  When the resultant change to the PTC system will comply with an approved PTCSP of this part, it is not necessary to file for approval to decrease the limits of a system when it involves the:

(1) Decrease of the limits of a PTC system when interlocked switches, derails, or movable-point frogs are not involved;

(2) Removal of an electric or mechanical lock, or signal used in lieu thereof, from hand-operated switch in a PTC system where train speed over such switch does not exceed 20 miles per hour, and use of those devices has not been part of the considerations for approval of a PTCSP; or

(3) Removal of an electric or mechanical lock, or signal used in lieu thereof, from a hand-operated switch in a PTC system where trains are not permitted to clear the main track at such switch and use of those devices has not been a part of the considerations for approval of a PTCSP.

(k) Modifications not requiring the filing of an RFA.  When the resultant arrangement will comply with an approved PTCSP of this part, it is not necessary to file an application for approval of the following modifications:

(1) A modification that is required to comply with an order of the Federal Railroad Administration or any section of part 236 of this title;

(2) Installation of devices used to provide protection against unusual contingencies such as landslide, burned bridges, high water, high and wide loads, or dragging equipment;

(3) Elimination of existing track other than a second main track;

(4) Extension or shortening of a passing siding; or

(5) The temporary or permanent arrangement of existing systems necessitated by highway-rail grade separation construction. Temporary arrangements shall be removed within six months following completion of construction.

(l) Any RFA to a PTCDP or PTCSP pursuant to this section may be submitted jointly with other host railroads utilizing the same type of PTC system. However, only host railroads with the same PTC System Certification classification under § 236.1015(e) may jointly file an RFA to their PTCSPs. Any joint RFA to multiple host railroads' PTCSPs must include the information required under paragraph (m) of this section. The joint RFA must also include the written confirmation and statement specified under paragraphs (m)(2)(iii) and (iv) of this section from each host railroad jointly filing the RFA.

(m) No changes, as specified under paragraph (h)(3) or (4) of this section, may be made to an FRA-certified PTC system or an FRA-approved PTCSP unless the host railroad first complies with the following process:

(1) The host railroad revises its PTCSP to account for each proposed change to its PTC system and summarizes such changes in a chronological table of revisions at the beginning of its PTCSP;

(2) The host railroad electronically submits the following information in an RFA to the Director of FRA's Office of Railroad Systems and Technology:

(i) A summary of the proposed changes to any safety-critical elements of a PTC system, including a summary of how the changes to the PTC system would affect its safety-critical functionality, how any new hazards have been addressed and mitigated, whether each change is a planned change that was previously included in all required analysis under § 236.1015 or an unplanned change, and the reason for the proposed changes, including whether the changes are necessary to address or resolve an emergency or urgent issue;

(ii) Any associated software release notes;

(iii) A confirmation that the host railroad has notified any applicable tenant railroads of the proposed changes, any associated effect on the tenant railroads' operations, and any actions the tenant railroads must take in accordance with the configuration control measures set forth in the host railroad's PTCSP;

(iv) A statement from a qualified representative of the host railroad, verifying that the modified PTC system would meet all technical requirements under this subpart, provide an equivalent or greater level of safety than the existing PTC system, and not adversely impact interoperability with any tenant railroads; and

(v) Any other information that FRA requests; and

(3) A host railroad shall not make any changes, as specified under paragraph (h)(3) or (4) of this section, to its PTC system until the Director of FRA's Office of Railroad Systems and Technology approves the RFA.

(i) FRA will approve, approve with conditions, or deny the RFA within 45 days of the date on which the RFA was filed under paragraph (m)(2) of this section.

(ii) FRA reserves the right to notify a railroad that changes may proceed prior to the 45-day mark, including in an emergency or under other circumstances necessitating a railroad's immediate implementation of the proposed changes to its PTC system.

(iii) FRA may require a railroad to modify its RFA or its PTC system to the extent necessary to ensure safety or compliance with the requirements of this part.

(iv) Following any FRA denial of an RFA, each applicable railroad is prohibited from making the proposed changes to its PTC system until the railroad both sufficiently addresses FRA's questions, comments, and concerns and obtains FRA's approval. Consistent with paragraph (l) of this section, any host railroads utilizing the same type of PTC system, including the same certification classification under § 236.1015(e), may jointly submit information to address FRA's questions, comments, and concerns following any denial of an RFA under this section.

[75 FR 2699, Jan. 15, 2010, as amended at 86 FR 40180, July 27, 2021]

§ 236.1023 Errors and malfunctions.

(a) Each railroad implementing a PTC system on its property shall establish and continually update a PTC Product Vendor List (PTCPVL) that includes all vendors and suppliers of each PTC system, subsystem, component, and associated product, and process in use system-wide. The PTCPVL shall be made available to FRA upon request.

(b) (1) The railroad shall specify within its PTCSP all contractual arrangements with hardware and software suppliers or vendors for immediate notification between the parties of any and all safety-critical software failures, upgrades, patches, or revisions, as well as any hardware repairs, replacements, or modifications for their PTC system, subsystems, or components.

(2) A vendor or supplier, on receipt of a report of any safety-critical failure to their product, shall promptly notify all other railroads that are using that product, whether or not the other railroads have experienced the reported failure of that safety-critical system, subsystem, or component.

(3) The notification from a supplier to any railroad shall include explanation from the supplier of the reasons for such notification, the circumstances associated with the failure, and any recommended mitigation actions to be taken pending determination of the root cause and final corrective actions.

(c) The railroad shall:

(1) Specify the railroad's process and procedures in its PTCSP for action upon their receipt of notification of safety-critical failure, as well as receipt of a safety-critical upgrade, patch, revision, repair, replacement, or modification.

(2) Identify configuration/revision control measures in its PTCSP that are designed to ensure the safety-functional requirements and the safety-critical hazard mitigation processes are not compromised as a result of any change and that such a change can be audited.

(d) The railroad shall provide to the applicable vendor or supplier the railroad's procedures for action upon notification of a safety-critical failure, upgrade, patch, or revision for the PTC system, subsystem, component, product, or process, and actions to be taken until the faulty system, subsystem, or component has been adjusted, repaired or replaced.

(e) After the product is placed in service, the railroad shall maintain a database of all safety-relevant hazards as set forth in the PTCSP and those that had not previously been identified in the PTCSP. If the frequency of the safety-relevant hazard exceeds the thresholds set forth in the PTCSP, or has not been previously identified in the appropriate risk analysis, the railroad shall:

(1) Notify the applicable vendor or supplier and FRA of the failure, malfunction, or defective condition that decreased or eliminated the safety functionality;

(2) Keep the applicable vendor or supplier and FRA apprised on a continual basis of the status of any and all subsequent failures; and

(3) Take prompt counter measures to reduce or eliminate the frequency of the safety-relevant hazards below the threshold identified in the PTCSP.

(f) Each notification to FRA required by this section shall:

(1) Be made within 15 days after the vendor, supplier, or railroad discovers the failure, malfunction, or defective condition. However, a report that is due on a Saturday or a Sunday may be delivered on the following Monday and one that is due on a holiday may be delivered on the next business day;

(2) Be transmitted in a manner and form acceptable to the Associate Administrator and by the most expeditious method available; and

(3) Include as much available and applicable information as possible, including:

(i) PTC system name and model;

(ii) Identification of the part, component, or system involved, including the part number as applicable;

(iii) Nature of the failure, malfunctions, or defective condition;

(iv) Mitigation taken to ensure the safety of train operation, railroad employees, and the public; and

(v) The estimated time to correct the failure.

(4) In the event that all information required by paragraph (f)(3) of this section is not immediately available, the non-available information shall be forwarded to the Associate Administrator as soon as practicable in supplemental reports.

(g) Whenever any investigation of an accident or service difficulty report shows that a PTC system or product is unsafe because of a manufacturing or design defect, the railroad and its vendor or supplier shall, upon request of the Associate Administrator, report to the Associate Administrator the results of its investigation and any action taken or proposed to correct that defect.

(h) PTC system and product suppliers and vendors shall:

(1) Promptly report any safety-relevant failures or defective conditions, previously unidentified hazards, and recommended mitigation actions in their PTC system, subsystem, or component to each railroad using the product; and

(2) Notify FRA of any safety-relevant failure, defective condition, or previously unidentified hazard discovered by the vendor or supplier and the identity of each affected and notified railroad.

(i) The requirements of this section do not apply to failures, malfunctions, or defective conditions that:

(1) Are caused by improper maintenance or improper usage; or

(2) Have been previously identified to the FRA, vendor or supplier, and applicable user railroads.

(j) When any safety-critical PTC system, subsystem, or component fails to perform its intended function, the cause shall be determined and the faulty product adjusted, repaired, or replaced without undue delay. Until corrective action is completed, a railroad shall take appropriate action to ensure safety and reliability as specified within its PTCSP.

(k) Any railroad experiencing a failure of a system resulting in a more favorable aspect than intended or other condition hazardous to the movement of a train shall comply with the reporting requirements, including the making of a telephonic report of an accident or incident involving such failure, under part 233 of this chapter. Filing of one or more reports under part 233 of this chapter does not exempt a railroad, vendor, or supplier from the reporting requirements contained in this section.

§ 236.1025 [Reserved]

§ 236.1027 PTC system exclusions.

(a) The requirements of this subpart apply to each office automation system that performs safety-critical functions within, or affects the safety performance of, the PTC system. For purposes of this section, “office automation system” means any centralized or distributed computer-based system that directly or indirectly controls the active movement of trains in a rail network.

(b) Changes or modifications to PTC systems otherwise excluded from the requirements of this subpart by this section do not exclude those PTC systems from the requirements of this subpart if the changes or modifications result in a degradation of safety or a material decrease in safety-critical functionality.

(c) Primary train control systems cannot be integrated with locomotive electronic systems unless the complete integrated systems:

(1) Have been shown to be designed on fail-safe principles;

(2) Have demonstrated to operate in a fail-safe mode;

(3) Have a manual fail-safe fallback and override to allow the locomotive to be brought to a safe stop in the event of any loss of electronic control; and

(4) Are included in the approved and applicable PTCDP and PTCSP.

(d) PTC systems excluded by this section from the requirements of this subpart remain subject to subparts A through H of this part as applicable.

§ 236.1029 PTC system use and failures.

(a) When any safety-critical PTC system component fails to perform its intended function, the cause must be determined and the faulty component adjusted, repaired, or replaced without undue delay. Until repair of such essential components is completed, a railroad shall take appropriate action as specified in its PTCSP.

(b) En route failures.  Except as provided in paragraphs (c) and (g) of this section, where a controlling locomotive that is operating in, or is to be operated within, a PTC-equipped track segment experiences PTC system failure or the PTC system is otherwise cut out while en route (i.e., after the train has departed its initial terminal), the train may only continue in accordance with all of the following:

(1) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(5) of this section, where no block signal system is in use, the train may proceed at a speed not to exceed 40 miles per hour; however, if the involved train is transporting one or more cars containing PIH materials, excluding those cars containing only a residue of PIH materials, the train may only proceed at a speed not to exceed 30 miles per hour.

(2) Where a block signal system is in place:

(i) A passenger train may proceed at a speed not to exceed 59 miles per hour;

(ii) A freight train transporting one or more cars containing PIH materials, excluding those cars containing only a residue of PIH materials, may proceed at a speed not to exceed 40 miles per hour; and

(iii) Any other freight train may proceed at a speed not to exceed 49 miles per hour.

(3) Where a cab signal system with an automatic train control system is in use, the train may proceed at a speed not to exceed 79 miles per hour.

(4) A report of the failure or cut-out must be made to a designated railroad officer of the host railroad as soon as safe and practicable.

(5) Where the PTC system is the exclusive method of delivering mandatory directives, an absolute block must be established in advance of the train as soon as safe and practicable, and the train shall not exceed restricted speed until the absolute block in advance of the train is established.

(6) Where the failure or cut-out is a result of a defective onboard PTC apparatus, the train may continue no farther than the next forward designated location for the repair or exchange of onboard PTC apparatuses.

(c) Exception for alternative system failure procedure.  A railroad may submit for approval a PTCSP, an RFA, or an Order of Particular Applicability with an alternative system failure procedure other than that required by paragraph (b) of this section. FRA may, in its discretion, approve such an alternative system failure procedure if it provides similar requirements of, and an equivalent or greater level of safety as, the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section.

(d) Each railroad shall comply with all provisions in the applicable PTCDP and PTCSP for each PTC system it uses and shall operate within the scope of initial operational assumptions and predefined changes identified.

(e) The normal functioning of any safety-critical PTC system must not be interfered with in testing or otherwise without first taking measures to provide for the safe movement of trains, locomotives, roadway workers, and on-track equipment that depend on the normal functioning of the system.

(f) [Reserved]

(g) Temporary exceptions.  From October 21, 2014 through the 24 months following the date of required PTC system implementation established by section 20157 of title 49 of the United States Code—

(1) A railroad's PTCSP or Order of Particular Applicability may provide for compliance with the en route failure requirements of § 236.567 instead of paragraph (b) of this section where a controlling locomotive that is operating in, or is to be operated within, a PTC-equipped track segment experiences PTC system failure or the PTC system is otherwise cut out while en route;

(2) A train may proceed as prescribed under either paragraph (b) of this section or § 236.567 where the PTC system fails to initialize for any reason prior to the train's departure from its initial terminal; and

(3) A railroad's PTCSP may provide for the temporary disabling of PTC system service where necessary to perform PTC system repair or maintenance. In this paragraph (g)(3), “PTC system service” does not refer to the failure of the onboard PTC apparatus for a single locomotive, locomotive consist, or train.

(i) The PTCSP shall specify appropriate operating rules to apply when the PTC system is temporarily disabled in accordance with this paragraph (g)(3).

(ii) The railroad shall make reasonable efforts to schedule the temporary disabling of PTC system service for times posing the least risk to railroad safety.

(iii) The railroad shall provide notice to the FRA regional office having jurisdiction over that territory at least 7 days in advance of planned temporary disabling of PTC system service and contemporaneous notice for unplanned temporary disabling of PTC system service.

(iv) The PTC system that is temporarily disabled in accordance with this paragraph (g)(3) shall be placed back into service without undue delay.

(h) Biannual Report of PTC System Performance. (1) Each host railroad subject to 49 U.S.C. 20157 or this subpart shall electronically submit a Biannual Report of PTC System Performance on Form FRA F 6180.152, containing the following information for the applicable reporting period, separated by the host railroad, each applicable tenant railroad, and each PTC-governed track segment (e.g., territory, subdivision, district, main line, branch, or corridor), consistent with the railroad's PTC Implementation Plan:

(i) The total number of PTC system initialization failures, and subtotals identifying the number of initialization failures where the source or cause was the onboard subsystem, wayside subsystem, communications subsystem, back office subsystem, or a non-PTC component;

(ii) The total number of PTC system cut outs, and subtotals identifying the number of cut outs where the source or cause was the onboard subsystem, wayside subsystem, communications subsystem, back office subsystem, or a non-PTC component;

(iii) The total number of PTC system malfunctions, and subtotals identifying the number of malfunctions where the source or cause was the onboard subsystem, wayside subsystem, communications subsystem, back office subsystem, or a non-PTC component;

(iv) The total number of enforcements by the PTC system;

(v) The number of enforcements by the PTC system in which an accident or incident was prevented;

(vi) The number of scheduled attempts at initialization of the PTC system; and

(vii) The number of train miles governed by the PTC system.

(2) A host railroad's Biannual Report of PTC System Performance (Form FRA F 6180.152) shall also include a summary of any actions the host railroad and its tenant railroads are taking to reduce the frequency and rate of initialization failures, cut outs, and malfunctions, such as any actions to correct or eliminate systemic issues and specific problems.

(3) Each host railroad shall electronically submit a Biannual Report of PTC System Performance (Form FRA F 6180.152) to FRA by the following due dates: July 31 (covering the period from January 1 to June 30), and January 31 (covering the period from July 1 to December 31 of the prior calendar year).

(4) Each tenant railroad that operates on a host railroad's PTC-governed main line(s), unless the tenant railroad is currently subject to an exception under § 236.1006(b)(4) or (5), shall submit the information required under paragraphs (h)(1) and (2) of this section to each applicable host railroad on a continuous basis.

(5) Any railroad operating a PTC system classified under FRA Type Approval Nos. FRA-TA-2010-001 or FRA-TA-2013-003 must begin submitting the metric required under paragraph (h)(1)(iv) of this section not later than January 31, 2023.

[75 FR 2699, Jan. 15, 2010, as amended at 79 FR 49717, Aug. 22, 2014; 86 FR 40181, July 27, 2021]

§ 236.1031 Previously approved PTC systems.

(a) Any PTC system fully implemented and operational prior to March 16, 2010, may receive PTC System Certification if the applicable PTC railroad, or one or more system suppliers and one or more PTC railroads, submits a Request for Expedited Certification (REC) letter to the Associate Administrator. The REC letter must do one of the following:

(1) Reference a product safety plan (PSP) approved by FRA under subpart H of this part and include a document fulfilling the requirements under §§ 236.1011 and 236.1013 not already included in the PSP;

(2) Attest that the PTC system has been approved by FRA and in operation for at least 5 years and has already received an assessment of Verification and Validation from an independent third party under part 236 or a waiver supporting such operation; or

(3) Attest that the PTC system is recognized under an Order issued prior to March 16, 2010.

(b) If an REC letter conforms to paragraph (a)(1) of this section, the Associate Administrator, at his or her sole discretion, may also issue a new Type Approval for the PTC system.

(c) In order to receive a Type Approval or PTC System Certification under paragraph (a) or (b) of this section, the PTC system must be shown to reliably execute the functionalities required by §§ 236.1005 and 236.1007 and otherwise conform to this subpart.

(d) Previous approval or recognition of a train control system, together with an established service history, may, at the request of the PTC railroad, and consistent with available safety data, be credited toward satisfaction of the safety case requirements set forth in this part for the PTCSP with respect to all functionalities and implementations contemplated by the approval or recognition.

(e) To the extent that the PTC system proposed for implementation under this subpart is different in significant detail from the system previously approved or recognized, the changes shall be fully analyzed in the PTCDP or PTCSP as would be the case absent prior approval or recognition.

(f) As used in this section—

(1) Approved  refers to approval of a Product Safety Plan under subpart H of this part.

(2) Recognized  refers to official action permitting a system to be implemented for control of train operations under an FRA order or waiver, after review of safety case documentation for the implementation.

(g) Upon receipt of an REC, FRA will consider all safety case information to the extent feasible and appropriate, given the specific facts before the agency. Nothing in this section limits re-use of any applicable safety case information by a party other than the party receiving:

(1) A prior approval or recognition referred to in this section; or

(2) A Type Approval or PTC System Certification under this subpart.

§ 236.1033 Communications and security requirements.

(a) All wireless communications between the office, wayside, and onboard components in a PTC system shall provide cryptographic message integrity and authentication.

(b) Cryptographic keys required under paragraph (a) of this section shall:

(1) Use an algorithm approved by the National Institute of Standards (NIST) or a similarly recognized and FRA approved standards body;

(2) Be distributed using manual or automated methods, or a combination of both; and

(3) Be revoked:

(i) If compromised by unauthorized disclosure of the cleartext key; or

(ii) When the key algorithm reaches its lifespan as defined by the standards body responsible for approval of the algorithm.

(c) The cleartext form of the cryptographic keys shall be protected from unauthorized disclosure, modification, or substitution, except during key entry when the cleartext keys and key components may be temporarily displayed to allow visual verification. When encrypted keys or key components are entered, the cryptographically protected cleartext key or key components shall not be displayed.

(d) Access to cleartext keys shall be protected by a tamper resistant mechanism.

(e) Each railroad electing to also provide cryptographic message confidentiality shall:

(1) Comply with the same requirements for message integrity and authentication under this section; and

(2) Only use keys meeting or exceeding the security strength required to protect the data as defined in the railroad's PTCSP and required under § 236.1013(a)(7).

(f) Each railroad, or its vendor or supplier, shall have a prioritized service restoration and mitigation plan for scheduled and unscheduled interruptions of service. This plan shall be included in the PTCDP or PTCSP as required by §§ 236.1013 or 236.1015, as applicable, and made available to FRA upon request, without undue delay, for restoration of communication services that support PTC system services.

(g) Each railroad may elect to impose more restrictive requirements than those in this section, consistent with interoperability requirements specified in the PTCSP for the system.

§ 236.1035 Field testing requirements.

(a) Before any field testing of an uncertified PTC system, or a product of an uncertified PTC system, or any regression testing of a certified PTC system is conducted on the general rail system, the railroad requesting the testing must provide:

(1) A complete description of the PTC system;

(2) An operational concepts document;

(3) A complete description of the specific test procedures, including the measures that will be taken to protect trains and on-track equipment;

(4) An analysis of the applicability of the requirements of subparts A through G of this part to the PTC system that will not apply during testing;

(5) The date the proposed testing shall begin;

(6) The test locations; and

(7) The effect on the current method of operation the PTC system will or may have under test.

(b) FRA may impose additional testing conditions that it believes may be necessary for the safety of train operations.

(c) Relief from regulations other than from subparts A through G of this part that the railroad believes are necessary to support the field testing, must be requested in accordance with part 211 of this title.

§ 236.1037 Records retention.

(a) Each railroad with a PTC system required to be installed under this subpart shall maintain at a designated office on the railroad:

(1) A current copy of each FRA approved Type Approval, if any, PTCDP, and PTCSP that it holds;

(2) Adequate documentation to demonstrate that the PTCSP and PTCDP meet the safety requirements of this subpart, including the risk assessment;

(3) An Operations and Maintenance Manual, pursuant to § 236.1039; and

(4) Training and testing records pursuant to § 236.1043(b).

(b) Results of inspections and tests specified in the PTCSP and PTCDP must be recorded pursuant to § 236.110.

(c) Each contractor providing services relating to the testing, maintenance, or operation of a PTC system required to be installed under this subpart shall maintain at a designated office training records required under § 236.1039(b).

(d) After the PTC system is placed in service, the railroad shall maintain a database of all safety-relevant hazards as set forth in the PTCSP and PTCDP and those that had not been previously identified in either document. If the frequency of the safety-relevant hazards exceeds the threshold set forth in either of these documents, then the railroad shall:

(1) Report the inconsistency in writing by mail, facsimile, e-mail, or hand delivery to the Director, Office of Safety Assurance and Compliance, FRA, 1200 New Jersey Ave, SE, Mail Stop 25, Washington, DC 20590, within 15 days of discovery. Documents that are hand delivered must not be enclosed in an envelope;

(2) Take prompt countermeasures to reduce the frequency of each safety-relevant hazard to below the threshold set forth in the PTCSP and PTCDP; and

(3) Provide a final report when the inconsistency is resolved to the FRA Director, Office of Safety Assurance and Compliance, on the results of the analysis and countermeasures taken to reduce the frequency of the safety-relevant hazard(s) below the threshold set forth in the PTCSP and PTCDP.

§ 236.1039 Operations and Maintenance Manual.

(a) The railroad shall catalog and maintain all documents as specified in the PTCDP and PTCSP for the installation, maintenance, repair, modification, inspection, and testing of the PTC system and have them in one Operations and Maintenance Manual, readily available to persons required to perform such tasks and for inspection by FRA and FRA-certified state inspectors.

(b) Plans required for proper maintenance, repair, inspection, and testing of safety-critical PTC systems must be adequate in detail and must be made available for inspection by FRA and FRA-certified state inspectors where such PTC systems are deployed or maintained. They must identify all software versions, revisions, and revision dates. Plans must be legible and correct.

(c) Hardware, software, and firmware revisions must be documented in the Operations and Maintenance Manual according to the railroad's configuration management control plan and any additional configuration/revision control measures specified in the PTCDP and PTCSP.

(d) Safety-critical components, including spare equipment, must be positively identified, handled, replaced, and repaired in accordance with the procedures specified in the PTCDP and PTCSP.

(e) Each railroad shall designate in its Operations and Maintenance Manual an appropriate railroad officer responsible for issues relating to scheduled interruptions of service contemplated by § 236.1029.

§ 236.1041 Training and qualification program, general.

(a) Training program for PTC personnel.  Employers shall establish and implement training and qualification programs for PTC systems subject to this subpart. These programs must meet the minimum requirements set forth in the PTCDP and PTCSP in §§ 236.1039 through 236.1045, as appropriate, for the following personnel:

(1) Persons whose duties include installing, maintaining, repairing, modifying, inspecting, and testing safety-critical elements of the railroad's PTC systems, including central office, wayside, or onboard subsystems;

(2) Persons who dispatch train operations (issue or communicate any mandatory directive that is executed or enforced, or is intended to be executed or enforced, by a train control system subject to this subpart);

(3) Persons who operate trains or serve as a train or engine crew member subject to instruction and testing under part 217 of this chapter, on a train operating in territory where a train control system subject to this subpart is in use;

(4) Roadway workers whose duties require them to know and understand how a train control system affects their safety and how to avoid interfering with its proper functioning; and

(5) The direct supervisors of persons listed in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(4) of this section.

(b) Competencies.  The employer's program must provide training for persons who perform the functions described in paragraph (a) of this section to ensure that they have the necessary knowledge and skills to effectively complete their duties related to operation and maintenance of the PTC system.

§ 236.1043 Task analysis and basic requirements.

(a) Training structure and delivery.  As part of the program required by § 236.1041, the employer shall, at a minimum:

(1) Identify the specific goals of the training program with regard to the target population (craft, experience level, scope of work, etc.), task(s), and desired success rate;

(2) Based on a formal task analysis, identify the installation, maintenance, repair, modification, inspection, testing, and operating tasks that must be performed on a railroad's PTC systems. This includes the development of failure scenarios and the actions expected under such scenarios;

(3) Develop written procedures for the performance of the tasks identified;

(4) Identify the additional knowledge, skills, and abilities above those required for basic job performance necessary to perform each task;

(5) Develop a training and evaluation curriculum that includes classroom, simulator, computer-based, hands-on, or other formally structured training designed to impart the knowledge, skills, and abilities identified as necessary to perform each task;

(6) Prior to assignment of related tasks, require all persons mentioned in § 236.1041(a) to successfully complete a training curriculum and pass an examination that covers the PTC system and appropriate rules and tasks for which they are responsible (however, such persons may perform such tasks under the direct onsite supervision of a qualified person prior to completing such training and passing the examination);

(7) Require periodic refresher training and evaluation at intervals specified in the PTCDP and PTCSP that includes classroom, simulator, computer-based, hands-on, or other formally structured training and testing, except with respect to basic skills for which proficiency is known to remain high as a result of frequent repetition of the task; and

(8) Conduct regular and periodic evaluations of the effectiveness of the training program specified in § 236.1041(a)(1) verifying the adequacy of the training material and its validity with respect to current railroads PTC systems and operations.

(b) Training records.  Employers shall retain records which designate persons who are qualified under this section until new designations are recorded or for at least one year after such persons leave applicable service. These records shall be kept in a designated location and be available for inspection and replication by FRA and FRA-certified State inspectors

§ 236.1045 Training specific to office control personnel.

(a) Any person responsible for issuing or communicating mandatory directives in territory where PTC systems are or will be in use shall be trained in the following areas, as applicable:

(1) Instructions concerning the interface between the computer-aided dispatching system and the train control system, with respect to the safe movement of trains and other on-track equipment;

(2) Railroad operating rules applicable to the train control system, including provision for movement and protection of roadway workers, unequipped trains, trains with failed or cut-out train control onboard systems, and other on-track equipment; and

(3) Instructions concerning control of trains and other on-track equipment in case the train control system fails, including periodic practical exercises or simulations, and operational testing under part 217 of this chapter to ensure the continued capability of the personnel to provide for safe operations under the alternative method of operation.

(b) [Reserved]

§ 236.1047 Training specific to locomotive engineers and other operating personnel.

(a) Operating personnel.  Training provided under this subpart for any locomotive engineer or other person who participates in the operation of a train in train control territory shall be defined in the PTCDP as well as the PTCSP. The following elements shall be addressed:

(1) Familiarization with train control equipment onboard the locomotive and the functioning of that equipment as part of the system and in relation to other onboard systems under that person's control;

(2) Any actions required of the onboard personnel to enable, or enter data to, the system, such as consist data, and the role of that function in the safe operation of the train;

(3) Sequencing of interventions by the system, including pre-enforcement notification, enforcement notification, penalty application initiation and post-penalty application procedures;

(4) Railroad operating rules and testing (part 217) applicable to the train control system, including provisions for movement and protection of any unequipped trains, or trains with failed or cut-out train control onboard systems and other on-track equipment;

(5) Means to detect deviations from proper functioning of onboard train control equipment and instructions regarding the actions to be taken with respect to control of the train and notification of designated railroad personnel; and

(6) Information needed to prevent unintentional interference with the proper functioning of onboard train control equipment.

(b) Locomotive engineer training.  Training required under this subpart for a locomotive engineer, together with required records, shall be integrated into the program of training required by part 240 of this chapter.

(c) Full automatic operation.  The following special requirements apply in the event a train control system is used to effect full automatic operation of the train:

(1) The PTCDP and PTCSP shall identify all safety hazards to be mitigated by the locomotive engineer.

(2) The PTCDP and PTCSP shall address and describe the training required with provisions for the maintenance of skills proficiency. As a minimum, the training program must:

(i) As described in § 236.1043(a)(2), develop failure scenarios which incorporate the safety hazards identified in the PTCDP and PTCSP including the return of train operations to a fully manual mode;

(ii) Provide training, consistent with § 236.1047(a), for safe train operations under all failure scenarios and identified safety hazards that affect train operations;

(iii) Provide training, consistent with § 236.1047(a), for safe train operations under manual control; and

(iv) Consistent with § 236.1047(a), ensure maintenance of manual train operating skills by requiring manual starting and stopping of the train for an appropriate number of trips and by one or more of the following methods:

(A) Manual operation of a train for a 4-hour work period;

(B) Simulated manual operation of a train for a minimum of 4 hours in a Type I simulator as required; or

(C) Other means as determined following consultation between the railroad and designated representatives of the affected employees and approved by FRA. The PTCDP and PTCSP shall designate the appropriate frequency when manual operation, starting, and stopping must be conducted, and the appropriate frequency of simulated manual operation.

(d) Conductor training.  Training required under this subpart for a conductor, together with required records, shall be integrated into the program of training required under this chapter.

§ 236.1049 Training specific to roadway workers.

(a) Roadway worker training.  Training required under this subpart for a roadway worker shall be integrated into the program of instruction required under part 214, subpart C of this chapter (“Roadway Worker Protection”), consistent with task analysis requirements of § 236.1043. This training shall provide instruction for roadway workers who provide protection for themselves or roadway work groups.

(b) Training subject areas. (1) Instruction for roadway workers shall ensure an understanding of the role of processor-based signal and train control equipment in establishing protection for roadway workers and their equipment.

(2) Instruction for all roadway workers working in territories where PTC is required under this subpart shall ensure recognition of processor-based signal and train control equipment on the wayside and an understanding of how to avoid interference with its proper functioning.

(3) Instructions concerning the recognition of system failures and the provision of alternative methods of on-track safety in case the train control system fails, including periodic practical exercises or simulations and operational testing under part 217 of this chapter to ensure the continued capability of roadway workers to be free from the danger of being struck by a moving train or other on-track equipment.


PART 27—NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF DISABILITY IN PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES RECEIVING FEDERAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

Authority:Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended (29 U.S.C. 794); 49 U.S.C. 5332.

Source:44 FR 31468, May 31, 1979, unless otherwise noted.

Subpart A—General

§ 27.1 Purpose.

The purpose of this part is to carry out the intent of section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794) as amended, to the end that no otherwise qualified individual with a disability in the United States shall, solely by reason of his or her disability, be excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.

§ 27.3 Applicability.

(a) This part applies to each recipient of Federal financial assistance from the Department of Transportation and to each program or activity that receives such assistance.

(b) Design, construction, or alteration of buildings or other fixed facilities by public entities subject to part 37 of this title shall be in conformance with appendices B and D of 36 CFR part 1191, as modified by appendix A to part 37 of this title. All other entities subject to section 504 shall design, construct, or alter buildings, or other fixed facilities, in conformance with appendices B and D of 36 CFR part 1191, as modified by appendix A to part 37 of this title.

[44 FR 31468, May 31, 1979, as amended at 56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991; 68 FR 51390, Aug. 26, 2003; 80 FR 46513, Aug. 5, 2015]

§ 27.5 Definitions.

As used in this part:

Act   means the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Public Law 93-112, as amended.

Applicant   means one who submits an application, request, or plan to be approved by a Departmental official or by a primary recipient as a condition to eligibility for Federal financial assistance, and application means such an application, request, or plan.

Commercial service airport   means an airport that is defined as a commercial service airport for purposes of the Federal Aviation Administration's Airport Improvement Program and that enplanes annually 2500 or more passengers and receives scheduled passenger service of aircraft.

Department   means the Department of Transportation.

Discrimination   means denying persons with a disability the opportunity to participate in or benefit from any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.

Facility   means all or any portion of buildings, structures, vehicles, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, or other real or personal property or interest in such property.

Federal financial assistance   means any grant, loan, contract (other than a procurement contract or a contract of insurance or guaranty), or any other arrangement by which the Department provides or otherwise makes available assistance in the form of:

(a) Funds;

(b) Services of Federal personnel; or

(c) Real or personal property or any interest in, or use of such property, including:

(1) Transfers or leases of such property for less than fair market value or for reduced consideration; and

(2) Proceeds from a subsequent transfer or lease of such property if the Federal share of its fair market value is not returned to the Federal Government.

Person with a disability   means (1) any person who (a) has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, (b) has a record of such an impairment, or (c) is regarded as having such an impairment. (2) As used in this definition, the phrase:

(a) Physical or mental impairment  means (i) any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular, reproductive; digestive; genito-urinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or (ii) any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. The term physical or mental impairment includes, but is not limited to, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech, and hearing impairments; cerebral palsy; epilepsy; muscular dystrophy; multiple sclerosis; cancer; heart disease; mental retardation; emotional illness; drug addiction; and alcoholism.

(b) Major life activities  means functions such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working.

(c) Has a record of such an impairment  means has a history of, or has been classified, or misclassified, as having a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities.

(d) Is regarded as having an impairment  means:

(1) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially limit major life activities but that is treated by a recipient as constituting such a limitation;

(2) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits major life activity only as a result of the attitudes of others toward such an impairment; or

(3) Has none of the impairments set forth in paragraph (1) of this definition, but is treated by a recipient as having such an impairment.

Head of Operating Administration   means the head of an operating administration within the Department (U.S. Coast Guard, Federal Highway Administration, Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Railroad Administration, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Federal Transit Administration, and Research and Special Programs Administration) providing Federal financial assistance to the recipient.

Primary recipient   means any recipient that is authorized or required to extend Federal financial assistance from the Department to another recipient.

Program or activity   means all of the operations of any entity described in paragraphs (1) through (4) of this definition, any part of which is extended Federal financial assistance:

(1) (i) A department, agency, special purpose district, or other instrumentality of a State or of a local government; or

(ii) The entity of such State or local government that distributes such assistance and each such department or agency (and each other State or local government entity) to which the assistance is extended, in the case of assistance to a State or local government;

(2) (i) A college, university, or other postsecondary institution, or a public system of higher education; or

(ii) A local educational agency (as defined in 20 U.S.C. 7801), system of vocational education, or other school system;

(3) (i) An entire corporation, partnership, or other private organization, or an entire sole proprietorship—

(A) If assistance is extended to such corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship as a whole; or

(B) Which is principally engaged in the business of providing education, health care, housing, social services, or parks and recreation; or

(ii) The entire plant or other comparable, geographically separate facility to which Federal financial assistance is extended, in the case of any other corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole proprietorship; or

(4) Any other entity which is established by two or more of the entities described in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.

Qualified person with a disability   means:

(1) With respect to employment, a person with a disability who, with reasonable accommodation and within normal safety requirements, can perform the essential functions of the job in question, but the term does not include any individual who is an alcoholic or drug abuser whose current use of alcohol or drugs prevents such person from performing the duties of the job in question or whose employment, by reason of such current alcohol or drug abuse, would constitute a direct threat to property or the safety of others; and

(2) With respect to other services, a person with a disability who meets the essential eligibility requirements for the receipt of such services.

Recipient   means any State, territory, possession, the District of Columbia, or Puerto Rico, or any political subdivision thereof, or instrumentality thereof, any public or private agency, institution, organization, or other entity, or any individual in any State, territory, possession, the District of Columbia, or Puerto Rico, to whom Federal financial assistance from the Department is extended directly or through another recipient, including any successor, assignee, or transferee thereof, but such term does not include any ultimate beneficiary.

Secretary   means the Secretary of Transportation.

Section 504   means section 504 of the Act.

Special service system   means a transportation system specifically designed to serve the needs of persons who, by reason of disability, are physically unable to use bus systems designed for use by the general public. Special service is characterized by the use of vehicles smaller than a standard transit bus which are usable by persons with a disability, demand-responsive service, point of origin to point of destination service, and flexible routing and scheduling.

[44 FR 31468, May 31, 1979, as amended by Amdt. 1, 46 FR 37492, July 20, 1981; Amdt. 27-3, 51 FR 19017, May 23, 1986; 56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991; 61 FR 32354, June 24, 1996; 61 FR 56424, Nov. 1, 1996; 68 FR 51390, Aug. 26, 2003; 79 FR 21405, Apr. 16, 2014]

§ 27.7 Discrimination prohibited.

(a) General.  No qualified person with a disability shall, solely by reason of his disability, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity that receives Federal financial assistance administered by the Department of Transportation.

(b) Discriminatory actions prohibited. (1) A recipient, in providing any aid, benefit, or service, may not, directly or through contractual, licensing, or other arrangements, on the basis of disability:

(i) Deny a qualified person with a disability the opportunity to participate in or benefit from the aid, benefit, or service;

(ii) Afford a qualified person with a disability an opportunity to participate in or benefit from the aid, benefit, or service that is not substantially equal to that afforded persons who are not disabled;

(iii) Provide a qualified person with a disability with an aid, benefit, or service that is not as effective in affording equal opportunity to obtain the same result, to gain the same benefit, or to reach the same level of achievement as persons who are not disabled;

(iv) Provide different or separate aid, benefits, or services to persons with a disability or to any class of persons with a disability unless such action is necessary to provide qualified persons with a disability with aid, benefits or services that are as effective as those provided to persons who are not disabled;

(v) Aid or perpetuate discrimination against a qualified person with a disability by providing financial or other assistance to an agency, organization, or person that discriminates on the basis of disability in providing any aid, benefit, or service to beneficiaries of the recipient's program or activity;

(vi) Deny a qualified person with a disability the opportunity to participate in conferences, in planning or advising recipients, applicants or would-be applicants, or

(vii) Otherwise limit a qualified person with a disability in the enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity enjoyed by others receiving an aid, benefit, or service.

(2) For purposes of this part, aids, benefits, and services, to be equally effective, are not required to produce the identical result or level of achievement for persons with and without a disability, but must afford persons with a disability equal opportunity to obtain the same result, to gain the same benefit, or to reach the same level of achievement, in the most integrated setting that is reasonably achievable.

(3) Even if separate or different aid, benefits, or services are available to persons with a disability, a recipient may not deny a qualified person with a disability the opportunity to participate in the programs or activities that are not separate or different.

(4) A recipient may not, directly or through contractual or other arrangements, utilize criteria or methods of administration:

(i) That have the effect of subjecting qualified persons with a disability to discrimination on the basis of disability,

(ii) That have the purpose or effect of defeating or substantially reducing the likelihood that persons with a disability can benefit by the objectives of the recipient's program or activity, or

(iii) That yield or perpetuate discrimination against another recipient if both recipients are subject to common administrative control or are agencies of the same State.

(5) In determining the site or location of a facility, an applicant or a recipient may not make selections:

(i) That have the effect of excluding persons with a disability from, denying them the benefits of, or otherwise subjecting them to discrimination under any program or activity that receives Federal financial assistance, or

(ii) That have the purpose or effect of defeating or substantially impairing the accomplishment of the objectives of the program or activity with respect to persons with a disability.

(6) As used in this section, the aid benefit, or service provided under a program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance includes any aid, benefit, or service provided in or through a facility that has been constructed, expanded, altered, leased or rented, or otherwise acquired, in whole or in part, with Federal financial assistance.

(c) Communications.  Recipients shall take appropriate steps to ensure that communications with their applicants, employees, and beneficiaries are available to persons with impaired vision and hearing.

(d) Aid, benefits, or services limited by Federal law.  For aid, benefits, or services authorized by Federal statute or executive order that are designed especially for persons with a disability, or for a particular class of persons with a disability, the exclusion of persons without a disability or other classes of persons with a disability is not prohibited by this part.

(e) Reasonable accommodations.  A recipient shall make reasonable accommodations in policies, practices, or procedures when such accommodations are necessary to avoid discrimination on the basis of disability unless the recipient can demonstrate that making the accommodations would fundamentally alter the nature of the service, program, or activity or result in an undue financial and administrative burden. For the purposes of this section, the term reasonable accommodation shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with the term “reasonable modifications” as set forth in the Americans with Disabilities Act title II regulations at 28 CFR 35.130(b)(7), and not as it is defined or interpreted for the purposes of employment discrimination under title I of the ADA (42 U.S.C. 12111-12112) and its implementing regulations at 29 CFR part 1630.

[44 FR 31468, May 31, 1979, as amended at 68 FR 51390, Aug. 26, 2003; 79 FR 21405, Apr. 16, 2014; 80 FR 13260, Mar. 13, 2015]

§ 27.9 Assurance required.

(a) General.  Each application for Federal financial assistance to which this part applies, and each application to provide a facility, shall, as a condition to approval or extension of any Federal financial assistance pursuant to the application, contain, or be accompanied by, written assurance that the program or activity will be conducted or the facility operated in compliance with all the requirements imposed by or pursuant to this part. An applicant may incorporate these assurances by reference in subsequent applications to the Department.

(b) Future effect of assurances.  Recipients of Federal financial assistance, and transferees of property obtained by a recipient with the participation of Federal financial assistance, are bound by the recipient's assurance under the following circumstances:

(1) When Federal financial assistance is provided in the form of a conveyance of real property or an interest in real property from the Department of Transportation to a recipient, the instrument of conveyance shall include a convenant running with the land binding the recipient and subsequent transferees to comply with the requirements of this part for so long as the property is used for the purpose for which the Federal financial assistance was provided or for a similar purpose.

(2) When Federal financial assistance is used by a recipient to purchase or improve real property, the assurance provided by the recipient shall obligate the recipient to comply with the requirements of this part and require any subsequent transferee of the property, who is using the property for the purpose for which the Federal financial assistance was provided, to agree in writing to comply with the requirements of this part. The obligations of the recipient and transferees under this part shall continue in effect for as long as the property is used for the purpose for which Federal financial assistance was provided or for a similar purpose.

(3) When Federal financial assistance is provided to the recipient in the form of, or is used by the recipient to obtain, personal property, the assurance provided by the recipient shall obligate the recipient to comply with the requirements of this part for the period it retains ownership or possession of the property or the property is used by a transferee for purposes directly related to the operations of the recipient.

(4) When Federal financial assistance is used by a recipient for purposes other than to obtain property, the assurance provided shall obligate the recipient to comply with the requirements of this part for the period during which the Federal financial assistance is extended to the program or activity.

[44 FR 31468, May 31, 1979, as amended at 68 FR 51390, Aug. 26, 2003]

§ 27.11 Remedial action, voluntary action and compliance planning.

(a) Remedial action. (1) If the responsible Departmental official finds that a qualified person with a disability has been excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or otherwise subjected to discrimination under, any program or activity in violation of this part, the recipient shall take such remedial action as the responsible Departmental official deems necessary to overcome the effects of the violation.

(2) Where a recipient is found to have violated this part, and where another recipient exercises control over the recipient that has violated this part, the responsible Departmental official, where appropriate, may require either or both recipients to take remedial action.

(3) The responsible Departmental official may, where necessary to overcome the effects of a violation of this part, require a recipient to take remedial action:

(i) With respect to persons with a disability who are no longer participants in the recipient's program or activity but who were participants in the program or activity when such discrimination occurred, and

(ii) With respect to persons with a disability who would have been participants in the program or activity had the discrimination not occurred.

(b) Voluntary action.  A recipient may take steps, in addition to any action that is required by this part, to assure the full participation in the recipient's program or activity by qualified persons with a disability.

(c) Compliance planning. (1) A recipient shall, within 90 days from the effective date of this part, designate and forward to the head of any operating administration providing financial assistance, with a copy to the responsible Departmental official the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the persons responsible for evaluating the recipient's compliance with this part.

(2) A recipient shall, within 180 days from the effective date of this part, after consultation at each step in paragraphs (c)(2) (i)-(iii) of this section with interested persons, including persons with a disability and organizations representing persons with a disability:

(i) Evaluate its current policies and practices for implementing these regulations, and notify the head of the operating administration of the completion of this evaluation;

(ii) Identify shortcomings in compliance and describe the methods used to remedy them;

(iii) Begin to modify, with official approval of recipient's management, any policies or practices that do not meet the requirements of this part according to a schedule or sequence that includes milestones or measures of achievement. These modifications shall be completed within one year from the effective date of this part;

(iv) Take appropriate remedial steps to eliminate the effects of any discrimination that resulted from previous policies and practices; and

(v) Establish a system for periodically reviewing and updating the evaluation.

(3) A recipient shall, for at least three years following completion of the evaluation required under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, maintain on file, make available for public inspection, and furnish upon request to the head of the operating administration:

(i) A list of the interested persons consulted;

(ii) A description of areas examined and any problems indentified; and

(iii) A description of any modifications made and of any remedial steps taken.

[44 FR 31468, May 31, 1979, as amended at 68 FR 51390, Aug. 26, 2003; 79 FR 21405, Apr. 16, 2014]

§ 27.13 Designation of responsible employee and adoption of complaint procedures.

(a) Designation of responsible employee.  Each recipient shall designate at least one person to coordinate its efforts to comply with this part.

(b) Adoption of complaint procedures.  A recipient shall adopt procedures that incorporate appropriate due process standards and provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints alleging any action prohibited by this part and 49 CFR parts 37, 38, and 39. The procedures shall meet the following requirements:

(1) The process for filing a complaint, including the name, address, telephone number, and email address of the employee designated under paragraph (a) of this section, must be sufficiently advertised to the public, such as on the recipient's Web site;

(2) The procedures must be accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities;

(3) The recipient must promptly communicate its response to the complaint allegations, including its reasons for the response, to the complainant by a means that will result in documentation of the response.

[80 FR 13260, Mar. 13, 2015]

§ 27.15 Notice.

(a) A recipient shall take appropriate initial and continuing steps to notify participants, beneficiaries, applicants, and employees, including those with impaired vision or hearing, and unions or professional organizations holding collective bargaining or professional agreements with the recipient, that it does not discriminate on the basis of disability. The notification shall state, where appropriate, that the recipient does not discriminate in admission or access to, or treatment or employment in, its programs or activities. The notification shall also include an identification of the responsible employee designated pursuant to § 27.13(a). A recipient shall make the initial notification required by this section within 90 days of the effective date of this part. Methods of initial and continuing notification may include the posting of notices, publication in newspapers and magazines, placement of notices in recipients' publications and distribution of memoranda or other written communications.

(b) If a recipient publishes or uses recruitment materials or publications containing general information that it makes available to participants, beneficiaries, applicants, or employees, it shall include in those materials or publications a statement of the policy described in paragraph (a) of this section. A recipient may meet the requirement of this paragraph either by including appropriate inserts in existing materials and publications or by revising and reprinting the materials and publications. In either case, the addition or revision must be specially noted.

§ 27.17 Effect of State or local law.

The obligation to comply with this part is not obviated or affected by any State or local law.

§ 27.19 Compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act requirements and FTA policy.

(a) Recipients subject to this part (whether public or private entities as defined in 49 CFR part 37) shall comply with all applicable requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101-12213) including the Department's ADA regulations (49 CFR parts 37 and 38), the regulations of the Department of Justice implementing titles II and III of the ADA (28 CFR parts 35 and 36), and the regulations of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) implementing title I of the ADA (29 CFR part 1630). Compliance with the EEOC title I regulations is required as a condition of compliance with section 504 for DOT recipients even for organizations which, because they have fewer than 25 or 15 employees, would not be subject to the EEOC regulation in its own right. Compliance with all these regulations is a condition of receiving Federal financial assistance from the Department of Transportation. Any recipient not in compliance with this requirement shall be subject to enforcement action under subpart C of this part.

(b) Consistent with FTA policy, any recipient of Federal financial assistance from the Federal Transit Administration whose solicitation was made before August 26, 1990, and is for one or more inaccessible vehicles, shall provide written notice to the Secretary (e.g., in the case of a solicitation made in the past under which the recipient can order additional new buses after the effective date of this section). The Secretary shall review each case individually, and determine whether the Department will continue to participate in the Federal grant, consistent with the provisions in the grant agreement between the Department and the recipient.

[55 FR 40763, Oct. 4, 1990, as amended at 56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991; 61 FR 32354, June 24, 1996; 79 FR 21405, Apr. 16, 2014]

Subpart B—Accessibility Requirements in Specific Operating Administration Programs: Airports, Railroads, and Highways

§ 27.71 Airport facilities.

(a) This section applies to all terminal facilities and services owned, leased, or operated on any basis by a recipient of DOT financial assistance at a commercial service airport, including parking and ground transportation facilities.

(b) Airport operators shall ensure that the terminal facilities and services subject to this section shall be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs. Airport operators shall be deemed to comply with this section 504 obligation if they meet requirements applying to state and local government programs or activities and facilities under Department of Justice (DOJ) regulations implementing Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).

(c) The airport shall ensure that there is an accessible path between the gate and the area from which aircraft are boarded.

(d) Systems of inter-terminal transportation, including, but not limited to, shuttle vehicles and people movers, shall comply with applicable requirements of the Department of Transportation's ADA rules.

(e) The Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAGs), including section 10.4 concerning airport facilities, shall be the standard for accessibility under this section.

(f) Contracts or leases between carriers and airport operators concerning the use of airport facilities shall set forth the respective responsibilities of the parties for the provision of accessible facilities and services to individuals with disabilities as required by this part and applicable ADA rules of the Department of Transportation and Department of Justice for airport operators and applicable Air Carrier Access Act rules (49 CFR part 382) for carriers.

(g) If an airport operator who receives Federal financial assistance for an existing airport facility has not already done so, the recipient shall submit a transition plan meeting the requirements of § 27.65(d) of this part to the FAA no later than March 3, 1997.

(h) Service animal relief areas.  Each airport with 10,000 or more annual enplanements shall cooperate with airlines that own, lease, or control terminal facilities at that airport to provide wheelchair accessible animal relief areas for service animals that accompany passengers departing, connecting, or arriving at the airport subject to the following requirements:

(1) Airports must consult with one or more service animal training organizations regarding the design, dimensions, materials and maintenance of service animal relief areas;

(2) Airports must establish at least one relief area in each airport terminal;

(3) Airports must establish the relief area required by paragrah (h)(2) of this section in the sterile area of each airport terminal unless:

(i) The Transportation Security Administration prohibits the airport from locating a relief area in the sterile area, or

(ii) A service animal training organization, the airport, and the carriers in the terminal in which the relief area will be located agree that a relief area would be better placed outside the terminal's sterile area. In that event, the airport must retain documentation evidencing the recommendation that the relief area be located outside of the sterile area; and

(4) To the extent airports have established service animal relief areas prior to the effective date of this paragraph:

(i) Airports that have not consulted with a service animal training organization shall consult with one or more such organizations regarding the sufficiency of all existing service animal relief areas,

(ii) Airports shall meet the requirements of this section August 4, 2016.

(i) High-contrast captioning (captioning that is at least as easy to read as white letters on a consistent black background) on television and audio-visual displays.  This paragraph applies to airports with 10,000 or more annual enplanements.

(1) Airport operators must enable or ensure high-contrast captioning at all times on all televisions and other audio-visual displays that are capable of displaying captions and that are located in any gate area, ticketing area, first-class or other passenger lounge provided by a U.S. or foreign carrier, or any common area of the terminal to which any passengers have access and that are owned, leased, or controlled by the airport.

(2) With respect to any televisions and other audio-visual displays located in any gate area, ticketing area, first-class or other passenger lounge provided by a U.S. or foreign carrier, or any common area of the terminal to which any passengers have access that provide passengers with safety briefings, information, or entertainment that do not have high-contrast captioning capability, an airport operator must replace or ensure the replacement of these devices with equipment that does have such capability whenever such equipment is replaced in the normal course of operations and/or whenever areas of the terminal in which such equipment is located undergo substantial renovation or expansion.

(3) If an airport installs new televisions and other audio-visual displays for passenger safety briefings, information, or entertainment on or after October 5, 2015, such equipment must have high-contrast captioning capability.

(j) Shared-use automated airport kiosks. This paragraph applies to U.S. airports with 10,000 or more annual enplanements.

(1) Airport operators that jointly own, lease, or control automated airport kiosks with carriers at U.S. airports must ensure that all shared-use automated kiosks installed on or after December 12, 2016 meet the design specifications set forth in paragraph (k) of this section until at least 25 percent of kiosks provided in each location at the airport (i.e., each cluster of kiosks and all stand-alone kiosks at the airport) meet this specification.

(2) Airport operators must ensure that at least 25 percent of shared-use automated airport kiosks they jointly own, lease, or control with carriers in each location at the airport meet the design specifications in paragraph (k) of this section by December 12, 2022.

(3) When shared-use kiosks provided in a location at the airport perform more than one function (e.g., print boarding passes/bag tags, accept payment for flight amenities such as seating upgrades/meals/WiFi access, rebook tickets, etc.), the accessible kiosks must provide all the same functions as the inaccessible kiosks in that location.

(4) Each shared-use automated kiosk that meets the design specifications in paragraph (k) of this section must be visually and tactilely identifiable to users as accessible (e.g., an international symbol of accessibility affixed to the front of the device) and maintained in proper working condition.

(5) Airport operators are jointly and severally liable with carriers for ensuring that shared-use automated airport kiosks are compliant with the requirements of paragraphs (j) and (k) of this section.

(k) Shared-use automated airport kiosks provided in accordance with paragraph (j) of this section must conform to the following technical accessibility standards with respect to their physical design and the functions they perform:

(1) Self contained.  Except for personal headsets and audio loops, automated kiosks must be operable without requiring the user to attach assistive technology.

(2) Clear floor or ground space.  A clear floor or ground space complying with section 305 of the U.S. Department of Justice's 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design, 28 CFR 35.104 (defining the “2010 Standards” for title II as the requirements set forth in appendices B and D to 36 CFR part 1191 and the requirements contained in 28 CFR 35.151) (hereinafter 2010 ADA Standards) must be provided.

(3) Operable parts.  Operable parts must comply with section 309 of the 2010 ADA Standards, and the following requirements:

(i) Identification.  Operable parts must be tactilely discernible without activation;

(ii) Timing.  Where a timed response is required, the user must be alerted visually and by touch or sound and must be given the opportunity to indicate that more time is required;

(iii) Status indicators.  Status indicators, including all locking or toggle controls or keys (e.g., Caps Lock and Num Lock keys), must be discernible visually and by touch or sound; and

(iv) Color.  Color coding must not be used as the only means of conveying information, indicating an action, prompting a response, or distinguishing a visual element.

(4) Privacy.  Automated airport kiosks must provide the opportunity for the same degree of privacy of input and output available to all individuals. However, if an option is provided to blank the screen in the speech output mode, the screen must blank when activated by the user, not automatically.

(5) Output.  Automated airport kiosks must comply with paragraphs (k)(5)(i) through (iv) of this section.

(i) Speech output enabled.  Automated airport kiosks must provide an option for speech output. Operating instructions and orientation, visible transaction prompts, user input verification, error messages, and all other visual information for full use must be accessible to and independently usable by individuals with vision impairments. Speech output must be delivered through a mechanism that is readily available to all users, including but not limited to, an industry standard connector or a telephone handset. Speech output must be recorded or digitized human, or synthesized. Speech output must be coordinated with information displayed on the screen. Speech output must comply with paragraphs (k)(5)(i)(A) through (D) of this section.

(A) When asterisks or other masking characters are used to represent personal identification numbers or other visual output that is not displayed for security purposes, the masking characters must be spoken (“*” spoken as “asterisk”) rather than presented as beep tones or speech representing the concealed information.

(B) Advertisements and other similar information are not required to be audible unless they convey information that can be used in the transaction being conducted.

(C) Speech for any single function must be automatically interrupted when a transaction is selected or navigation controls are used. Speech must be capable of being repeated and paused by the user.

(D) Where receipts, tickets, or other outputs are provided as a result of a transaction, speech output must include all information necessary to complete or verify the transaction, except that -

(1) Automated airport kiosk location, date and time of transaction, customer account numbers, and the kiosk identifier are not required to be audible;

(2) Information that duplicates information available on-screen and already presented audibly is not required to be repeated; and

(3) Printed copies of a carrier's contract of carriage, applicable fare rules, itineraries and other similar supplemental information that may be included with a boarding pass are not required to be audible.

(ii) Volume control.  Automated kiosks must provide volume control complying with paragraphs (k)(5)(ii)(A) and (B) of this section.

(A) Private listening.  Where speech required by paragraph (k)(5)(i) is delivered through a mechanism for private listening, the automated kiosk must provide a means for the user to control the volume. A function must be provided to automatically reset the volume to the default level after every use.

(B) Speaker volume.  Where sound is delivered through speakers on the automated kiosk, incremental volume control must be provided with output amplification up to a level of at least 65 dB SPL. Where the ambient noise level of the environment is above 45 dB SPL, a volume gain of at least 20 dB above the ambient level must be user selectable. A function must be provided to automatically reset the volume to the default level after every use.

(iii) Captioning.  Multimedia content that contains speech or other audio information necessary for the comprehension of the content must be open or closed captioned.

Advertisements and other similar information are not required to be captioned unless they convey information that can be used in the transaction being conducted.

(iv) Tickets and boarding passes.  Where tickets or boarding passes are provided, tickets and boarding passes must have an orientation that is tactilely discernible if orientation is important to further use of the ticket or boarding pass.

(6) Input.  Input devices must comply with paragraphs (k)(6)(i) through (iv) of this section.

(i) Input controls.  At least one input control that is tactilely discernible without activation must be provided for each function. Where provided, key surfaces not on active areas of display screens, must be raised above surrounding surfaces. Where touch or membrane keys are the only method of input, each must be tactilely discernible from surrounding surfaces and adjacent keys.

(ii) Alphabetic keys.  Alphabetic keys must be arranged in a QWERTY keyboard layout. The “F” and “J” keys must be tactilely distinct from the other keys.

(iii) Numeric keys.  Numeric keys must be arranged in a 12-key ascending or descending keypad layout or must be arranged in a row above the alphabetic keys on a QWERTY keyboard. The “5” key must be tactilely distinct from the other keys.

(iv) Function keys.  Function keys must comply with paragraphs (k)(6)(iv)(A) and (B) of this section.

(A) Contrast.  Function keys must contrast visually from background surfaces. Characters and symbols on key surfaces must contrast visually from key surfaces. Visual contrast must be either light-on-dark or dark-on-light. However, tactile symbols required by (k)(6)(iv)(B) are not required to comply with paragraph (k)(6)(iv)(A) of this section.

(B) Tactile symbols.  Function key surfaces must have tactile symbols as follows: Enter or Proceed key: raised circle; Clear or Correct key: raised left arrow; Cancel key: raised letter ex; Add Value key: raised plus sign; Decrease Value key: raised minus sign.

(7) Display screen.  The display screen must comply with paragraphs (k)(7)(i) and (ii) of this section.

(i) Visibility.  The display screen must be visible from a point located 40 inches (1015 mm) above the center of the clear floor space in front of the automated kiosk.

(ii) Characters.  Characters displayed on the screen must be in a sans serif font. Characters must be 3/16 inch (4.8 mm) high minimum based on the uppercase letter “I.” Characters must contrast with their background with a minimum luminosity contrast ratio of 3:1.

(8) Braille instructions.  Braille instructions for initiating the speech mode must be provided. Braille must comply with section 703.3 of the 2010 ADA Standards.

(9) Biometrics.  Biometrics must not be the only means for user identification or control, unless at least two biometric options that use different biological characteristics are provided.

[61 FR 56424, Nov. 1, 1996, as amended at 68 FR 51391, Aug. 26, 2003; 78 FR 67917, Nov. 12, 2013; 80 FR 46513, Aug. 5, 2015]

§ 27.72 Boarding assistance for aircraft.

(a) This section applies to airports with 10,000 or more annual enplanements.

(b) Airports shall, in cooperation with carriers serving the airports, provide boarding assistance to individuals with disabilities using mechanical lifts, ramps, or other devices that do not require employees to lift or carry passengers up stairs. This section applies to all aircraft with a passenger capacity of 19 or more passenger seats, except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section. Paragraph (c) of this section applies to U.S. carriers and paragraph (d) of this section applies to foreign carriers.

(c) Each airport operator shall negotiate in good faith with each U.S. carrier serving the airport concerning the acquisition and use of boarding assistance devices to ensure the provision of mechanical lifts, ramps, or other devices for boarding and deplaning where level-entry loading bridges are not available. The airport operator must have a written, signed agreement with each U.S. carrier allocating responsibility for meeting the boarding and deplaning assistance requirements of this section between or among the parties. The agreement shall be made available, on request, to representatives of the Department of Transportation.

(1) All airport operators and U.S. carriers involved are jointly and severally responsible for the timely and complete implementation of the agreement.

(2) The agreement shall ensure that all lifts and other accessibility equipment are maintained in proper working condition.

(d) Each airport operator shall negotiate in good faith with each foreign carrier serving the airport concerning the acquisition and use of boarding assistance devices to ensure the provision of mechanical lifts, ramps, or other devices for boarding and deplaning where level-entry loading bridges are not available. The airport operator shall, by no later than November 3, 2015, sign a written agreement with the foreign carrier allocating responsibility for meeting the boarding and deplaning assistance requirements of this section between or among the parties. The agreement shall be made available, on request, to representatives of the Department of Transportation.

(1) The agreement shall provide that all actions necessary to ensure accessible boarding and deplaning for passengers with disabilities are completed as soon as practicable, but no later than December 3, 2015.

(2) All airport operators and foreign carriers involved are jointly and severally responsible for the timely and complete implementation of the agreement.

(3) The agreement shall ensure that all lifts and other accessibility equipment are maintained in proper working condition.

(e) Boarding assistance agreements required in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section are not required to apply to the following situations:

(1) Access to float planes;

(2) Access to the following 19-seat capacity aircraft models: The Fairchild Metro, the Jetstream 31 and 32, the Beech 1900 (C and D models), and the Embraer EMB-120;

(3) Access to any other aircraft model determined by the Department of Transportation to be unsuitable for boarding and deplaning assistance by lift, ramp, or other suitable device. The Department will make such a determination if it concludes that—

(i) No existing boarding and deplaning assistance device on the market will accommodate the aircraft without significant risk of serious damage to the aircraft or injury to passengers or employees, or

(ii) Internal barriers are present in the aircraft that would preclude passengers who use a boarding or aisle chair from reaching a non-exit row seat.

(f) When level-entry boarding and deplaning assistance is not required to be provided under paragraph (e) of this section, or cannot be provided as required by paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this section (e.g., because of mechanical problems with a lift), boarding assistance shall be provided by any available means to which the passenger consents. However, hand-carrying (i.e., directly picking up the passenger's body in the arms of one or more carrier personnel to effect a level change the passenger needs to enter or leave the aircraft) must never be used, even if the passenger consents, unless this is the only way of evacuating the individual in the event of an emergency.

(g) In the event that airport personnel are involved in providing boarding assistance, the airport shall ensure that they are trained to proficiency in the use of the boarding assistance equipment used at the airport and appropriate boarding assistance procedures that safeguard the safety and dignity of passengers.

[80 FR 46514, Aug. 5, 2015]

§ 27.75 Federal Highway Administration—highways.

(a) New facilities —(1) Highway rest area facilities.  All such facilities that will be constructed with Federal financial assistance shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the accessibility standards referenced in § 27.3(b) of this part.

(2) Curb cuts.  All pedestrian crosswalks constructed with Federal financial assistance shall have curb cuts or ramps to accommodate persons in wheelchairs, pursuant to section 228 of the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1973 (23 U.S.C. 402(b)(1)(F)).

(3) Pedestrian over-passes, under-passes and ramps.  Pedestrian over-passes, under-passes and ramps, constructed with Federal financial assistance, shall be accessible to persons with a disability, including having gradients no steeper than 10 percent, unless:

(i) Alternate safe means are provided to enable mobility-limited persons to cross the roadway at that location; or

(ii) It would be infeasible for mobility-limited persons to reach the over-passes, under-passes or ramps because of unusual topographical or architectural obstacles unrelated to the federally assisted facility.

(b) Existing facilities—Rest area facilities.  Rest area facilities on Interstate highways shall be made accessible to persons with a disability, including wheelchair users, within a three-year period after the effective date of this part. Other rest area facilities shall be made accessible when Federal financial assistance is used to improve the rest area, or when the roadway adjacent to or in the near vicinity of the rest area is constructed, reconstructed or otherwise altered with Federal financial assistance.

[44 FR 31468, May 31, 1979, as amended by Amdt. 27-3, 51 FR 19017, May 23, 1986. Redesignated at 56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991, as amended at 79 FR 21405, Apr. 16, 2014]

§ 27.77 Recipients of Essential Air Service subsidies.

Any air carrier receiving Federal financial assistance from the Department of Transportation under the Essential Air Service Program shall, as a condition of receiving such assistance, comply with applicable requirements of this part and applicable section 504 and ACAA rules of the Department of Transportation.

[61 FR 56425, Nov. 1, 1996, as amended at 68 FR 51391, Aug. 26, 2003]

Subpart C—Enforcement

Source:44 FR 31468, May 31, 1979, unless otherwise noted. Redesignated at 56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991.

§ 27.121 Compliance information.

(a) Cooperation and assistance.  The responsible Departmental official, to the fullest extent practicable, seeks the cooperation of recipients in securing compliance with this part and provides assistance and guidance to recipients to help them comply with this part.

(b) Compliance reports.  Each recipient shall keep on file for one year all complaints of noncompliance received. A record of all such complaints, which may be in summary form, shall be kept for five years. Each recipient shall keep such other records and submit to the responsible Departmental official or his/her designee timely, complete, and accurate compliance reports at such times, and in such form, and containing such information as the responsible Department official may prescribe. In the case in which a primary recipient extends Federal financial assistance to any other recipient, the other recipient shall also submit compliance reports to the primary recipient so as to enable the primary recipient to prepare its report.

(c) Access to sources of information.  Each recipient shall permit access by the responsible Departmental official or his/her designee during normal business hours to books, records, accounts, and other sources of information, and to facilities that are pertinent to compliance with this part. Where required information is in the exclusive possession of another agency or person who fails or refuses to furnish the information, the recipient shall so certify in its report and describe the efforts made to obtain the information. Considerations of privacy or confidentiality do not bar the Department from evaluating or seeking to enforce compliance with this part. Information of a confidential nature obtained in connection with compliance evaluation or enforcement is not disclosed by the Department, except in formal enforcement proceedings, where necessary, or where otherwise required by law.

(d) Information to beneficiaries and participants.  Each recipient shall make available to participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons such information regarding the provisions of this regulation and its application to the program or activity for which the recipient receives Federal financial assistance, and make such information available to them in such manner, as the responsible Departmental official finds necessary to apprise them of the protections against discrimination provided by the Act and this part.

[44 FR 31468, May 31, 1979. Redesignated at 56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991. 68 FR 51391, Aug. 26, 2003]

§ 27.123 Conduct of investigations.

(a) Periodic compliance reviews.  The responsible Departmental official or his/her designee, from time to time, reviews the practices of recipients to determine whether they are complying with this part.

(b) Complaints.  Any person who believes himself/herself or any specific class of individuals to be harmed by failure to comply with this part may, personally or through a representative, file a written complaint with the responsible Departmental official. A Complaint must be filed not later than 180 days from the date of the alleged discrimination, unless the time for filing is extended by the responsible Departmental official or his/her designee.

(c) Investigations.  The responsible Departmental official or his/her designee makes a prompt investigation whenever a compliance review, report, complaint, or any other information indicates a possible failure to comply with this part. The investigation includes, where appropriate, a review of the pertinent practices and policies of the recipient, and the circumstances under which the possible noncompliance with this part occurred.

(d) Resolution of matters. (1) If, after an investigation pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section, the responsible Departmental official finds reasonable cause to believe that there is a failure to comply with this part, the responsible Departmental official will inform the recipient. The matter is resolved by informal means whenever possible. If the responsible Departmental official determines that the matter cannot be resolved by informal means, action is taken as provided in § 27.125.

(2) If an investigation does not warrant action pursuant to paragraph (d)(1) of this section, the responsible Departmental official or his/her designee so informs the recipient and the complainant, if any, in writing.

(e) Intimidating and retaliatory acts prohibited.  No employee or contractor of a recipient shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any individual for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by section 504 of the Act or this part, or because the individual has made a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, hearing, or proceeding, under this part. The identity of complainants is kept confidential at their election during the conduct of any investigation, hearing or proceeding under this part. However, when such confidentiality is likely to hinder the investigation, the complainant will be advised for the purpose of waiving the privilege.

§ 27.125 Compliance procedure.

(a) General.  If there is reasonable cause for the responsible Departmental official to believe that there is a failure to comply with any provision of this part that cannot be corrected by informal means, the responsible Departmental official may recommend suspension or termination of, or refusal to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance, or take any other steps authorized by law. Such other steps may include, but are not limited to:

(1) A referral to the Department of Justice with a recommendation that appropriate proceedings be brought to enforce any rights of the United States under any law of the United States (including other titles of the Act), or any assurance or other contractural undertaking; and

(2) Any applicable proceeding under State or local law.

(b) Refusal of Federal financial assistance. (1) No order suspending, terminating, or refusing to grant or continue Federal financial assistance becomes effective until:

(i) The responsible Departmental official has advised the applicant or recipient of its failure to comply and has determined that compliance cannot be secured by voluntary means; and

(ii) There has been an express finding by the Secretary on the record, after opportunity for hearing, of a failure by the applicant or recipient to comply with a requirement imposed by or pursuant to this part.

(2) Any action to suspend, terminate, or refuse to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance is limited to the particular recipient who has failed to comply, and is limited in its effect to the particular program or activity, or part thereof, in which noncompliance has been found.

(c) Other means authorized by law.  No other action is taken until:

(1) The responsible Departmental official has determined that compliance cannot be secured by voluntary means;

(2) The recipient or other person has been notified by the responsible Departmental official of its failure to comply and of the proposed action;

(3) The expiration of at least 10 days from the mailing of such notice to the recipient or other person. During this period, additional efforts are made to persuade the recipient or other person to comply with the regulations and to take such corrective action as may be appropriate.

[44 FR 31468, May 31, 1979. Redesignated at 56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991. 68 FR 51391, Aug. 26, 2003]

§ 27.127 Hearings.

(a) Opportunity for hearing.  Whenever an opportunity for a hearing is required by § 27.125(b), reasonable notice is given by the responsible Departmental official by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the affected applicant or recipient. This notice advises the applicant or recipient of the action proposed to be taken, the specific provision under which the proposed action is to be taken, and the matters of fact or law asserted as the basis for this action, and either:

(1) Fixes a date not less than 20 days after the date of such notice within which the applicant or recipient may request a hearing; or

(2) Advises the applicant or recipient that the matter in question has been set for hearing at a stated place and time.

The time and place shall be reasonable and subject to change for cause. The complainant, if any, also is advised of the time and place of the hearing. An applicant or recipient may waive a hearing and submit written information and argument for the record. The failure of an applicant or recipient to request a hearing constitutes a waiver of the right to a hearing under section 504 of the Act and § 27.125(b), and consent to the making of a decision on the basis of such information as may be part of the record. 

(b) If the applicant or recipient waives its opportunity for a hearing, the responsible Departmental official shall notify the applicant or recipient that it has the opportunity to submit written information and argument for the record. The responsible Departmental official may also place written information and argument into the record.

(c) Time and place of hearing.  Hearings are held at the office of the Department in Washington, DC, at a time fixed by the responsible Departmental official unless he/she determines that the convenience of the applicant or recipient or of the Department requires that another place be selected. Hearings are held before an Administrative Law Judge designated in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 3105 and 3344 (section 11 of the Administrative Procedure Act).

(d) Right to counsel.  In all proceedings under this section, the applicant or recipient and the responsible Departmental official have the right to be represented by counsel.

(e) Procedures, evidence and record. (1) The hearing, decision, and any administrative review thereof are conducted in conformity with sections 554 through 557 of title 5 of the United States Code, and in accordance with such rules of procedure as are proper (and not inconsistent with this section) relating to the conduct of the hearing, giving notice subsequent to those provided for in paragraph (a) of this section, taking testimony, exhibits, arguments and briefs, requests for findings, and other related matters. The responsible Departmental official and the applicant or recipient are entitled to introduce all relevant evidence on the issues as stated in the notice for hearing or as determined by the officer conducting the hearing. Any person (other than a government employee considered to be on official business) who, having been invited or requested to appear and testify as a witness on the government's behalf, attends at a time and place scheduled for a hearing provided for by this part may be reimbursed for his/her travel and actual expenses in an amount not to exceed the amount payable under the standardized travel regulations applicable to a government employee traveling on official business.

(2) Technical rules of evidence do not apply to hearings conducted pursuant to this part, but rules or principles designed to assure production of the most credible evidence available and to subject testimony to cross examination are applied where reasonably necessary by the Administrative Law Judge conducting the hearing. The Administrative Law Judge may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence. All documents and other evidence offered or taken for the record are open to examination by the parties and opportunity is given to refute facts and arguments advanced by either side. A transcript is made of the oral evidence except to the extent the substance thereof is stipulated for the record. All decisions are based on the hearing record and written findings shall be made.

(f) Consolidation or joint hearings.  In cases in which the same or related facts are asserted to constitute noncompliance with this regulation with respect to two or more Federal statutes, authorities, or other means by which Federal financial assistance is extended and to which this part applies, or noncompliance with this part and the regulations of one or more other Federal departments or agencies issued under section 504 of the Act, the responsible Departmental official may, in agreement with such other departments or agencies, where applicable, provide for consolidated or joint hearings. Final decisions in such cases, insofar as this regulation is concerned, are made in accordance with § 27.129.

[44 FR 31468, May 31, 1979. Redesignated at 56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991. 68 FR 51391, Aug. 26, 2003]

§ 27.129 Decisions and notices.

(a) Decisions by Administrative Law Judge.  After the hearing, the Administrative Law Judge certifies the entire record including his recommended findings and proposed decision to the Secretary for a final decision. A copy of the certification is mailed to the applicant or recipient and to the complainant, if any. The responsible Departmental official and the applicant or recipient may submit written arguments to the Secretary concerning the Administrative Law Judge's recommended findings and proposed decision.

(b) Final decision by the Secretary.  When the record is certified to the Secretary by the Administrative Law Judge, the Secretary reviews the record and accepts, rejects, or modifies the Administrative Law Judge's recommended findings and proposed decision, stating the reasons therefor.

(c) Decisions if hearing is waived.  Whenever a hearing pursuant to § 27.125(b) is waived, the Secretary makes his/her final decision on the record, stating the reasons therefor.

(d) Rulings required.  Each decision of the Administrative Law Judge or the Secretary contains a ruling on each finding or conclusion presented and specifies any failures to comply with this part.

(e) Content of orders.  The final decision may provide for suspension or termination, or refusal to grant or continue Federal financial assistance, in whole or in part, to which this first regulation applies. The decision may contain such terms, conditions, and other provisions as are consistent with and will effectuate the purposes of the Act and this part, including provisions designed to assure that no Federal financial assistance to which this regulation applies will thereafter be extended unless and until the recipient corrects its noncompliance and satisfies the Secretary that it will fully comply with this part.

(f) Subsequent proceedings. (1) An applicant or recipient adversely affected by an order issued under paragraph (e) of this section is restored to full eligibility to receive Federal financial assistance if it satisfies the terms and conditions of that order or if it brings itself into compliance with this part and provides reasonable assurance that it will fully comply with this part.

(2) Any applicant or recipient adversely affected by an order entered pursuant to paragraph (e) of this section may, at any time, request the responsible Departmental official to restore its eligibility, to receive Federal financial assistance. Any request must be supported by information showing that the applicant or recipient has met the requirements of paragraph (f)(1) of this section. If the responsible Departmental official determines that those requirements have been satisfied, he/she may restore such eligibility, subject to the approval of the Secretary.

(3) If the responsible Departmental official denies any such request, the applicant or recipient may submit a request, in writing, for a hearing specifying why it believes the responsible Departmental official should restore it to full eligibility. It is thereupon given a prompt hearing, with a decision on the record. The applicant or recipient is restored to eligibility if it demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary at the hearing that it satisfied the requirements of paragraph (f)(1) of this section.

(4) The hearing procedures of § 27.127(b) through (c) and paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section apply to hearings held under paragraph (f)(3) of this section.

(5) While proceedings under this paragraph are pending, the sanctions imposed by the order issued under paragraph (e) of this section shall remain in effect.

[44 FR 31468, May 31, 1979. Redesignated at 56 FR 45621, Sept. 6, 1991. 68 FR 51391, Aug. 26, 2003]


PART 234—GRADE CROSSING SAFETY

Authority:49 U.S.C. 20103, 20107, 20152, 20160, 21301, 21304, 21311, 22907 note; 28 U.S.C. 2461 note; and 49 CFR 1.89.

Source:61 FR 31806, June 20, 1996, unless otherwise noted.

Subpart A—General

§ 234.1 Scope.

(a) This part prescribes minimum—

(1) Maintenance, inspection, and testing standards for highway-rail grade crossing warning systems;

(2) Standards for the reporting of failures of highway-rail grade crossing warning systems and for the actions that railroads must take when such systems malfunction;

(3) Requirements for certain identified States to update their existing State highway-rail grade crossing action plans and submit reports about the implementation of their existing plans and for the remaining States and the District of Columbia to develop State highway-rail grade crossing action plans;

(4) Requirements that certain railroads establish systems for receiving toll-free telephone calls reporting various unsafe conditions at highway-rail grade crossings and pathway grade crossings, and for taking certain actions in response to those calls; and

(5) Requirements for reporting to, and periodically updating information contained in, the U.S. DOT National Highway-Rail Crossing Inventory for highway-rail and pathway crossings.

(b) This part does not restrict a railroad from adopting and enforcing additional or more stringent requirements not inconsistent with this part.

[77 FR 35190, June 12, 2012, as amended at 80 FR 786, Jan. 6, 2015; 85 FR 80659, Dec. 14, 2020]

§ 234.3 Application and responsibility for compliance.

(a) With the exception of § 234.11, this part applies to all railroads except the following:

(1) Operations of a plant railroad as defined in § 234.5;

(2) Rapid transit operations in an urban area that are not connected to the general railroad system of transportation; or

(3) Tourist, scenic, historic, or excursion operations conducted only on track used exclusively for that purpose (i.e., there is no freight, intercity passenger, or commuter passenger railroad operation on the track) and only on track inside an installation that is insular; i.e., the operations are limited to a separate enclave in such a way that there is no reasonable expectation that the safety of the public—except a business guest, a licensee of the railroad or an affiliated entity, or a trespasser—would be affected by the operation. An operation will not be considered insular if one or more of the following exists on its line:

(i) A public highway-rail crossing that is in use;

(ii) An at-grade rail crossing that is in use;

(iii) A bridge over a public road or waters used for commercial navigation; or

(iv) A common corridor with a railroad, i.e., its operations are within 30 feet of those of any railroad.

(b) Although the duties imposed by this part are generally stated in terms of the duty of a railroad, each person, including a contractor or subcontractor for a railroad, who performs any task covered by this part, shall perform that task in accordance with this part.

[77 FR 35190, June 12, 2012]

§ 234.5 Definitions.

As used in this part:

Accident/incident   means any impact between railroad on-track equipment and a highway user at a highway-rail grade crossing or pathway grade crossing. The term “highway user” includes automobiles, buses, trucks, motorcycles, bicycles, farm vehicles, pedestrians, and all other modes of surface transportation motorized and un-motorized.

Activation failure   means the failure of an active highway-rail grade crossing warning system to indicate the approach of a train at least 20 seconds prior to the train's arrival at the crossing, or to indicate the presence of a train occupying the crossing, unless the crossing is provided with an alternative means of active warning to highway users of approaching trains. (This failure indicates to the motorist that it is safe to proceed across the railroad tracks when, in fact, it is not safe to do so.) A grade crossing signal system does not indicate the approach of a train within the meaning of this paragraph if—more than 50% of the flashing lights (not gate arm lights) on any approach lane to the crossing are not functioning as intended, or in the case of an approach lane for which two or more pairs of flashing lights are provided, there is not at least one flashing light pair operating as intended. Back lights on the far side of the crossing are not considered in making these determinations.

Appropriately equipped flagger   means a person other than a train crewmember who is equipped with a vest, shirt, or jacket of a color appropriate for daytime flagging such as orange, yellow, strong yellow green or fluorescent versions of these colors or other generally accepted high visibility colors. For nighttime flagging, similar outside garments shall be retro reflective. Acceptable hand signal devices for daytime flagging include “ STOP/SLOW” paddles or red flags. For nighttime flagging, a flashlight, lantern, or other lighted signal shall be used. Inasmuch as Part VI of the Federal Highway Administration's Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices addresses standards and guides for flaggers and flagging equipment for highway traffic control, FRA recommends that railroads be aware of the standards and follow them to the greatest extent possible. Copies of the latest MUTCD provisions regarding flagging will be available from FRA, as well as FMCSA, as changes are made in this area.

Credible report of warning system malfunction or credible report of warning system malfunction at a highway-rail grade crossing   means a report that contains specific information regarding a malfunction of a highway-rail grade crossing warning system at an identified highway-rail grade crossing, supplied by a railroad employee, law enforcement officer, highway traffic official, or other employee of a public agency acting in an official capacity.

False activation   means the activation of a highway-rail grade crossing warning system caused by a condition that requires correction or repair of the grade crossing warning system. (This failure indicates to the motorist that it is not safe to cross the railroad tracks when, in fact, it is safe to do so.)

FRA   means the Office of Railroad Safety, Federal Railroad Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590.

Highway-rail grade crossing   means a location where a public highway, road, street, or private roadway, including associated sidewalks and pathways, crosses one or more railroad tracks at grade.

Partial activation   means activation of a highway-rail grade crossing warning system indicating the approach of a train, however, the full intended warning is not provided due to one of the following conditions:

(1) At non-gated crossings equipped with one pair of lights designed to flash alternately, one of the two lights does not operate properly (and approaching motorists can not clearly see flashing back lights from the warning lights on the other side of the crossing);

(2) At gated crossings, the gate arm is not in a horizontal position; or

(3) At gated crossings, any portion of a gate arm is missing if that portion normally had a gate arm flashing light attached.

Pathway grade crossing   means a pathway that crosses one or more railroad tracks at grade and that is—

(1) Explicitly authorized by a public authority or a railroad;

(2) Dedicated for the use of non-vehicular traffic, including pedestrians, bicyclists, and others; and

(3) Not associated with a public highway, road, or street, or a private roadway.

Plant railroad   means a plant or installation that owns or leases a locomotive, uses that locomotive to switch cars throughout the plant or installation, and is moving goods solely for use in the facility's own industrial processes. The plant or installation could include track immediately adjacent to the plant or installation if the plant railroad leases the track from the general system railroad and the lease provides for (and actual practice entails) the exclusive use of that trackage by the plant railroad and the general system railroad for purposes of moving only cars shipped to or from the plant. A plant or installation that operates a locomotive to switch or move cars for other entities, even if solely within the confines of the plant or installation, rather than for its own purposes or industrial processes, will not be considered a plant railroad because the performance of such activity makes the operation part of the general railroad system of transportation.

State highway-rail grade crossing action plan or Action Plan   means a document submitted to FRA for review and approval by a State of the United States (or the District of Columbia), which contains the elements required by § 234.11(e) to address safety at highway-rail and pathway grade crossings.

Train   means one or more locomotives, with or without cars.

Warning system malfunction or warning system malfunction at a highway-rail grade crossing   means an activation failure, a partial activation, or a false activation of a highway-rail grade crossing warning system.

[61 FR 31806, June 20, 1996, as amended at 77 FR 35191, June 12, 2012; 85 FR 80659, Dec. 14, 2020]

§ 234.6 Penalties.

(a) Civil penalty.  Any person (an entity of any type covered under 1 U.S.C. 1, including but not limited to the following: A railroad; a manager, supervisor, official, or other employee or agent of a railroad; any owner, manufacturer, lessor, or lessee of railroad equipment, track, or facilities; any independent contractor providing goods or services to a railroad; and any employee of such owner, manufacturer, lessor, lessee, or independent contractor) who violates any requirement of this part, except for any violation of § 234.11, or causes the violation of any such requirement is subject to a civil penalty of at least $1,086, but not more than $35,516 per violation, except that: Penalties may be assessed against individuals only for willful violations, and where a grossly negligent violation or a pattern of repeated violations has created an imminent hazard of death or injury to persons, or has caused death or injury, a penalty not to exceed $142,063 per violation may be assessed. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. FRA's website at www.fra.dot.gov contains a schedule of civil penalty amounts used in connection with this part. The railroad is not responsible for compliance with respect to any condition inconsistent with the technical standards set forth in this part where such variance arises as a result of actions beyond the control of the railroad and the railroad could not have prevented the variance through the exercise of due diligence. The foregoing sentence does not excuse any instance of noncompliance resulting from the actions of the railroad's employees, agents, or contractors.

(b) Criminal penalty.  Whoever knowingly and willfully makes, causes to be made, or participates in the making of a false entry in reports required to be filed by this part, or files a false report or other document required to be filed by this part, except for any document filed pursuant to § 234.11, is subject to a $5,000 fine and 2 years imprisonment as prescribed by 49 U.S.C. 522(a) and 21311(a).

[74 FR 36558, June 28, 2010, as amended at 77 FR 24422, Apr. 24, 2012; 81 FR 43111, July 1, 2016; 82 FR 16134, Apr. 3, 2017; 83 FR 60749, Nov. 27, 2018; 84 FR 23736, May 23, 2019; 84 FR 37074, July 31, 2019; 86 FR 1759, Jan. 11, 2021; 86 FR 23255, May 3, 2021; 87 FR 15869, Mar. 21, 2022; 88 FR 1128, Jan. 6, 2023; 88 FR 89563, Dec. 28, 2023]

Subpart B—Reports and Plans

§ 234.7 Accidents involving grade crossing signal failure.

(a) Each railroad shall report to FRA every impact between on-track railroad equipment and an automobile, bus, truck, motorcycle, bicycle, farm vehicle, or pedestrian at a highway-rail grade crossing involving an activation failure. Notification shall be provided to the National Response Center within 24 hours of occurrence at (800) 424-0201. Complete reports shall thereafter be filed with FRA pursuant to § 234.9 of this part (activation failure report) and 49 CFR 225.11 (accident/ incident report).

(b) Each telephone report must state the:

(1) Name of the railroad;

(2) Name, title, and telephone number of the individual making the report;

(3) Time, date, and location of accident;

(4) U. S. DOT-AAR Grade Crossing Identification Number;

(5) Circumstances of the accident, including operating details of the grade crossing warning device;

(6) Number of persons killed or injured, if any;

(7) Maximum authorized train speed; and

(8) Posted highway speed limit, if known.

§ 234.9 Grade crossing signal system failure reports.

Each railroad shall report to FRA within 15 days each activation failure of a highway-rail grade crossing warning system. FRA Form No. 6180-83, “Highway-Rail Grade Crossing Warning System Failure Report,” shall be used for this purpose and completed in accordance with instructions printed on the form.

§ 234.11 State highway-rail grade crossing action plans.

(a) Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to reduce accident/incidents at highway-rail and pathway grade crossings nationwide by requiring States and the District of Columbia to develop or update highway-rail grade crossing action plans and implement them. This section does not restrict any other entity from adopting a highway-rail grade crossing action plan. This section also does not restrict any State or the District of Columbia from adopting a highway-rail grade crossing action plan with additional or more stringent requirements not inconsistent with this section.

(b) New Action Plans. (1) Except for the 10 States identified in paragraph (c)(3) of this section, each State and the District of Columbia shall develop a State highway-rail grade crossing action plan that addresses each of the required elements listed in paragraph (e) of this section and submit such plan to FRA for review and approval not later than February 14, 2022.

(2) Each State and the District of Columbia shall submit its highway-rail grade crossing action plan electronically through FRA's website in Portable Document Format (PDF).

(c) Updated Action Plan and implementation report. (1) Each of the 10 States listed in paragraph (c)(3) of this section shall develop and submit to FRA for review and approval an updated State highway-rail grade crossing action plan that addresses each of the required elements listed in paragraph (e) of this section, not later than February 14, 2022.

(2) Each of the 10 States listed in paragraph (c)(3) of this section shall also develop and submit to FRA, not later than February 14, 2022, a report describing:

(i) How the State implemented the State highway-rail grade crossing action plan that it previously submitted to FRA for review and approval; and

(ii) How the State will continue to reduce highway-rail and pathway grade crossing safety risks.

(3) The requirements of this paragraph (c) apply to the following States: Alabama, California, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Louisiana, Ohio, and Texas.

(d) Electronic submission of updated Action Plan and implementation report.  Each of the 10 States listed in paragraph (c)(3) of this section shall submit its updated highway-rail grade crossing action plan and implementation report electronically through FRA's website in PDF form.

(e) Required elements for State highway-rail grade crossing action plans.  Each State highway-rail grade crossing action plan described in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section shall:

(1) Identify highway-rail and pathway grade crossings that:

(i) Have experienced at least one accident/incident within the previous 3 years;

(ii) Have experienced more than one accident/incident within the previous 5 years; or

(iii) Are at high-risk for accidents/incidents as defined in the Action Plan. Each State or the District of Columbia that identifies highway-rail and pathway grade crossings that are at high-risk for accidents/incidents in its Action Plan shall provide a list of the factors that were considered when making this determination. At a minimum, these factors shall include:

(A) Average annual daily traffic;

(B) Total number of trains per day that travel through each crossing;

(C) Total number of motor vehicle collisions at each crossing during the previous 5-year period;

(D) Number of main tracks at each crossing;

(E) Number of roadway lanes at each crossing;

(F) Sight distance (stopping, corner and clearing) at each crossing;

(G) Roadway geometry (vertical and horizontal) at each crossing; and

(H) Maximum timetable speed;

(2) Identify data sources used to categorize the highway-rail and pathway grade crossings in paragraph (e)(1) of this section;

(3) Discuss specific strategies, including highway-rail grade crossing closures or grade separations, to improve safety at those crossings over a period of at least four years;

(4) Provide an implementation timeline for the strategies discussed in paragraph (e)(3) of this section; and

(5) Designate an official responsible for managing implementation of the State highway-rail grade crossing action plan.

(f) Point of contact for State highway-rail grade crossing action plans. (1) When the State or the District of Columbia submits its highway-rail grade crossing action plan or updated Action Plan and implementation report electronically through FRA's website, the following information shall be provided to FRA for the designated official described in paragraph (e)(5) of this section:

(i) The name and title of the designated official;

(ii) The business mailing address for the designated official;

(iii) The email address for the designated official; and

(iv) The daytime business telephone number for the designated official.

(2) If the State or the District of Columbia designates another official to assume the responsibilities described in paragraph (e)(5) of this section before December 16, 2024, the State or the District of Columbia shall contact FRA and provide the information listed in paragraph (f)(1) of this section for the new designated official.

(g) Review and approval. (1) FRA will update its website to reflect receipt of each new, updated, or corrected highway-rail grade crossing action plan submitted pursuant to this section.

(2) (i) Within 60 days of receipt of each new, updated, or corrected highway-rail grade crossing action plan, FRA will conduct a preliminary review of the Action Plan to ascertain whether the elements prescribed in paragraph (e) of this section are adequately addressed in the plan.

(ii) Each new, updated, or corrected State highway-rail grade crossing action plan shall be considered conditionally approved for purposes of this section sixty (60) days after receipt by FRA unless FRA notifies the designated official described in paragraph (e)(5) of this section that the highway-rail grade crossing action plan is incomplete or deficient.

(iii) FRA reserves the right to conduct a more comprehensive review of each new, updated, or corrected State highway-rail grade crossing action plan within 120 days of receipt.

(3) If FRA determines that the new, updated, or corrected highway-rail grade crossing action plan is incomplete or deficient:

(i) FRA will provide email notification to the designated official described in paragraph (e)(5) of this section of the specific areas in which the Action Plan is deficient or incomplete and allow the State or the District of Columbia to complete the plan and correct the deficiencies identified.

(ii) Within 60 days of the date of FRA's email notification identifying the specific areas in which the highway-rail grade crossing action plan is incomplete or deficient, the State or District of Columbia shall correct all deficiencies and submit the corrected State highway-rail grade crossing action plan to FRA for approval. The corrected highway-rail grade crossing action plan shall be submitted electronically through FRA's website in PDF format.

(4) (i) When a new, updated, or corrected State highway-rail grade crossing action plan is fully approved, FRA will provide email notification to the designated official described in paragraph (e)(5) of this section.

(ii) FRA will make each fully-approved State highway-rail grade crossing action plan publicly available for online viewing.

(iii) Each State and the District of Columbia shall implement its fully-approved highway-rail grade crossing action plan.

(h) Condition for grants.  The Secretary of Transportation may condition the awarding of any grants under 49 U.S.C. ch. 244 on the State's or District of Columbia's submission of an FRA-approved State highway-rail grade crossing action plan under this section.

[85 FR 80659, Dec. 14, 2020; 86 FR 10857, Feb. 23, 2021]

Subpart C—Response to Credible Reports of Warning System Malfunction at Highway-Rail Grade Crossings

§ 234.101 Employee notification rules.

Each railroad shall issue rules requiring its employees to report to persons designated by that railroad, by the quickest means available, any warning system malfunction.

§ 234.103 Timely response to report of malfunction.

(a) Upon receipt of a credible report of a warning system malfunction, a railroad having maintenance responsibility for the warning system shall promptly investigate the report and determine the nature of the malfunction. The railroad shall take appropriate action as required by § 234.207.

(b) Until repair or correction of the warning system is completed, the railroad shall provide alternative means of warning highway traffic and railroad employees in accordance with §§ 234.105, 234.106 or 234.107 of this part.

(c) Nothing in this subpart requires repair of a warning system, if, acting in accordance with applicable State law, the railroad proceeds to discontinue or dismantle the warning system. However, until repair, correction, discontinuance, or dismantling of the warning system is completed, the railroad shall comply with this subpart to ensure the safety of the traveling public and railroad employees.

§ 234.105 Activation failure.

Upon receipt of a credible report of warning system malfunction involving an activation failure, a railroad having maintenance responsibility for the warning system shall promptly initiate efforts to warn highway users and railroad employees at the subject crossing by taking the following actions:

(a) Prior to any train's arrival at the crossing, notify the train crew of the report of activation failure and notify any other railroads operating over the crossing;

(b) Notify the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the crossing, or railroad police capable of responding and controlling vehicular traffic; and

(c) Provide for alternative means of actively warning highway users of approaching trains, consistent with the following requirements (see appendix B for a summary chart of alternative means of warning):

(1) (i) If an appropriately equipped flagger provides warning for each direction of highway traffic, trains may proceed through the crossing at normal speed.

(ii) If at least one uniformed law enforcement officer (including a railroad police officer) provides warning to highway traffic at the crossing, trains may proceed through the crossing at normal speed.

(2) If an appropriately equipped flagger provides warning for highway traffic, but there is not at least one flagger providing warning for each direction of highway traffic, trains may proceed with caution through the crossing at a speed not exceeding 15 miles per hour. Normal speed may be resumed after the locomotive has passed through the crossing.

(3) If there is not an appropriately equipped flagger or uniformed law enforcement officer providing warning to highway traffic at the crossing, each train must stop before entering the crossing and permit a crewmember to dismount to flag highway traffic to a stop. The locomotive may then proceed through the crossing, and the flagging crewmember may reboard the locomotive before the remainder of the train proceeds through the crossing.

(d) A locomotive's audible warning device shall be activated in accordance with railroad rules regarding the approach to a grade crossing.

§ 234.106 Partial activation.

Upon receipt of a credible report of a partial activation, a railroad having maintenance responsibility for the warning system shall promptly initiate efforts to warn highway users and railroad employees at the subject crossing in the same manner as required for false activations (§ 234.107).

§ 234.107 False activation.

Upon receipt of a credible report of a false activation, a railroad having maintenance responsibility for the highway-rail grade crossing warning system shall promptly initiate efforts to warn highway users and railroad employees at the crossing by taking the following actions:

(a) Prior to a train's arrival at the crossing, notify the train crew of the report of false activation and notify any other railroads operating over the crossing;

(b) Notify the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the crossing, or railroad police capable of responding and controlling vehicular traffic; and

(c) Provide for alternative means of actively warning highway users of approaching trains, consistent with the following requirements (see Appendix B for a summary chart of alternative means of warning).

(1) (i) If an appropriately equipped flagger is providing warning for each direction of highway traffic, trains may proceed through the crossing at normal speed.

(ii) If at least one uniformed law enforcement officer (including a railroad police officer) provides warning to highway traffic at the crossing, trains may proceed through the crossing at normal speed.

(2) If there is not an appropriately equipped flagger providing warning for each direction of highway traffic, or if there is not at least one uniformed law enforcement officer providing warning, trains with the locomotive or cab car leading, may proceed with caution through the crossing at a speed not exceeding 15 miles per hour. Normal speed may be resumed after the locomotive has passed through the crossing. In the case of a shoving move, a crewmember shall be on the ground to flag the train through the crossing.

(3) In lieu of complying with paragraphs (c) (1) or (2) of this section, a railroad may temporarily take the warning system out of service if the railroad complies with all requirements of § 234.105, “Activation failure.”

(d) A locomotive's audible warning device shall be activated in accordance with railroad rules regarding the approach to a grade crossing.

§ 234.109 Recordkeeping.

(a) Each railroad shall keep records pertaining to compliance with this subpart. Records may be kept on forms provided by the railroad or by electronic means. Each railroad shall keep the following information for each credible report of warning system malfunction:

(1) Location of crossing (by highway name and DOT/AAR Crossing Inventory Number);

(2) Time and date of receipt by railroad of report of malfunction;

(3) Actions taken by railroad prior to repair and reactivation of repaired system; and

(4) Time and date of repair.

(b) Each railroad shall retain for at least one year (from the latest date of railroad activity in response to a credible report of malfunction) all records referred to in paragraph (a) of this section. Records required to be kept shall be made available to FRA as provided by 49 U.S.C. 20107 (formerly 208 of the Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970 (45 U.S.C. 437)).

Subpart D—Maintenance, Inspection, and Testing

Maintenance Standards

§ 234.201 Location of plans.

Plans required for proper maintenance and testing shall be kept at each highway-rail grade crossing warning system location. Plans shall be legible and correct.

§ 234.203 Control circuits.

All control circuits that affect the safe operation of a highway-rail grade crossing warning system shall operate on the fail-safe principle.

§ 234.205 Operating characteristics of warning system apparatus.

Operating characteristics of electromagnetic, electronic, or electrical apparatus of each highway-rail crossing warning system shall be maintained in accordance with the limits within which the system is designed to operate.

§ 234.207 Adjustment, repair, or replacement of component.

(a) When any essential component of a highway-rail grade crossing warning system fails to perform its intended function, including but not limited to failures resulting in an activation failure, partial activation, or false activation, the cause shall be determined and the faulty component adjusted, repaired, or replaced without undue delay.

(b) If the failure of an essential component results in an activation failure, partial activation, or false activation, as defined in § 234.5, a railroad shall take appropriate action under § 234.105, Activation failure, § 234.106, Partial activation, or § 234.107, False activation, until adjustment, repair, or replacement of the essential component is completed.

[79 FR 49715, Aug. 22, 2014]

§ 234.209 Interference with normal functioning of system.

(a) The normal functioning of any system shall not be interfered with in testing or otherwise without first taking measures to provide for safety of highway traffic that depends on normal functioning of such system.

(b) Interference includes, but is not limited to:

(1) Trains, locomotives or other railroad equipment standing within the system's approach circuit, other than normal train movements or switching operations, where the warning system is not designed to accommodate those activities.

(2) Not providing alternative methods of maintaining safety for the highway user while testing or performing work on the warning systems or on track and other railroad systems or structures which may affect the integrity of the warning system.

§ 234.211 Security of warning system apparatus.

Highway-rail grade crossing warning system apparatus shall be secured against unauthorized entry.

§ 234.213 Grounds.

(a) General.  Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, each circuit that affects the proper functioning of a highway-rail grade crossing warning system shall be kept free of any ground or combination of grounds that will permit a current flow of 75 percent or more of the value necessary to retain a permissive state of a safety appliance.

(b) Exception.  Paragraph (a) of this section does not apply to the following:

(1) Circuits that include track rail;

(2) Alternating current power distribution circuits that are grounded in the interest of safety;

(3) Circuitry internal to microprocessor-based appliances;

(4) Circuitry internal to semiconductor-based memory; and

(5) Common return wires of grounded common return single break circuits.

[79 FR 49715, Aug. 22, 2014]

§ 234.215 Standby power system.

A standby source of power shall be provided with sufficient capacity to operate the warning system for a reasonable length of time during a period of primary power interruption. The designated capacity shall be specified on the plans required by § 234.201 of this part.

[66 FR 49560, Sept. 28, 2001]

§ 234.217 Flashing light units.

(a) Each flashing light unit shall be properly positioned and aligned and shall be visible to a highway user approaching the crossing.

(b) Each flashing light unit shall be maintained to prevent dust and moisture from entering the interior of the unit. Roundels and reflectors shall be clean and in good condition.

(c) All light units shall flash alternately. The number of flashes per minute for each light unit shall be 35 minimum and 65 maximum.

§ 234.219 Gate arm lights and light cable.

Each gate arm light shall be maintained in such condition to be properly visible to approaching highway users. Lights and light wire shall be secured to the gate arm.

§ 234.221 Lamp voltage.

The voltage at each lamp shall be maintained at not less than 85 percent of the prescribed rating for the lamp.

§ 234.223 Gate arm.

Each gate arm, when in the downward position, shall extend across each lane of approaching highway traffic and shall be maintained in a condition sufficient to be clearly viewed by approaching highway users. Each gate arm shall start its downward motion not less than three seconds after flashing lights begin to operate and shall assume the horizontal position at least five seconds before the arrival of any normal train movement through the crossing. At those crossings equipped with four quadrant gates, the timing requirements of this section apply to entrance gates only.

§ 234.225 Activation of warning system.

A highway-rail grade crossing warning system shall be maintained to activate in accordance with the design of the warning system, but in no event shall it provide less than 20 seconds warning time for the normal operation of through trains before the grade crossing is occupied by rail traffic.

§ 234.227 Train detection apparatus.

(a) Train detection apparatus shall be maintained to detect a train or railcar in any part of a train detection circuit, in accordance with the design of the warning system.

(b) If the presence of sand, rust, dirt, grease, or other foreign matter is known to prevent effective shunting, a railroad shall take appropriate action under § 234.105, “Activation failure,” to safeguard highway users.

§ 234.229 Shunting sensitivity.

Each highway-rail grade crossing train detection circuit shall detect the application of a shunt of 0.06 ohm resistance when the shunt is connected across the track rails of any part of the circuit.

§ 234.231 Fouling wires.

Each set of fouling wires in a highway-rail grade crossing train detection circuit shall consist of at least two discrete conductors. Each conductor shall be of sufficient conductivity and shall be maintained in such condition to ensure proper operation of the train detection apparatus when the train detection circuit is shunted. Installation of a single duplex wire with single plug acting as fouling wires is prohibited. Existing installations having single duplex wires with a single plug for fouling wires may be continued in use until they require repair or replacement.

§ 234.233 Rail joints.

Each non-insulated rail joint located within the limits of a highway-rail grade crossing train detection circuit shall be bonded by means other than joint bars and the bonds shall be maintained in such condition to ensure electrical conductivity.

§ 234.235 Insulated rail joints.

Each insulated rail joint used to separate train detection circuits of a highway-rail grade crossing shall be maintained to prevent current from flowing between rails separated by the insulation in an amount sufficient to cause a failure of the train detection circuit.

§ 234.237 Reverse switch cut-out circuit.

A switch, when equipped with a switch circuit controller connected to the point and interconnected with warning system circuitry, shall be maintained so that the warning system can only be cut out when the switch point is within one-half inch of full reverse position.

§ 234.239 Tagging of wires and interference of wires or tags with signal apparatus.

Each wire shall be tagged or otherwise so marked that it can be identified at each terminal. Tags and other marks of identification shall be made of insulating material and so arranged that tags and wires do not interfere with moving parts of the apparatus. This requirement applies to each wire at each terminal in all housings including switch circuit controllers and terminal or junction boxes. This requirement does not apply to flashing light units, gate arm light units and other auxiliary light units. The local wiring on a solid state crossing controller rack does not require tags if the wiring is an integral part of the solid state equipment.

§ 234.241 Protection of insulated wire; splice in underground wire.

Insulated wire shall be protected from mechanical injury. The insulation shall not be punctured for test purposes. A splice in underground wire shall have insulation resistance at least equal to that of the wire spliced.

§ 234.243 Wire on pole line and aerial cable.

Wire on a pole line shall be securely attached to an insulator that is properly fastened to a cross arm or bracket supported by a pole or other support. Wire shall not interfere with, or be interfered with by, other wires on the pole line. Aerial cable shall be supported by messenger wire. An open-wire transmission line operating at voltage of 750 volts or more shall be placed not less than 4 feet above the nearest cross arm carrying active warning system circuits.

§ 234.245 Signs.

Each sign mounted on a highway-rail grade crossing signal post shall be maintained in good condition and be visible to the highway user.

Inspections and Tests

§ 234.247 Purpose of inspections and tests; removal from service of relay or device failing to meet test requirements.

(a) The inspections and tests set forth in §§ 234.249 through 234.271 are required at highway-rail grade crossings located on in service railroad tracks and shall be made to determine if the warning system and its component parts are maintained in a condition to perform their intended function.

(b) If a railroad elects not to comply with the requirements of §§ 234.249 through 234.271 because all tracks over the grade crossing are out of service or the railroad suspends operations during a portion of the year, and the grade crossing warning system is also temporarily taken out of service, a full inspection and all required tests must be successfully completed before railroad operations over the grade crossing resume.

(c) Any electronic device, relay, or other electromagnetic device that fails to meet the requirements of tests required by this part shall be removed from service and shall not be restored to service until its operating characteristics are in accordance with the limits within which such device or relay is designed to operate.

[61 FR 31806, June 20, 1996, as amended at 66 FR 49560, Sept. 28, 2001]

§ 234.249 Ground tests.

A test for grounds on each energy bus furnishing power to circuits that affect the safety of warning system operation shall be made when such energy bus is placed in service and at least once each month thereafter.

§ 234.251 Standby power.

Standby power shall be tested at least once each month.

§ 234.253 Flashing light units and lamp voltage.

(a) Each flashing light unit shall be inspected when installed and at least once every twelve months for proper alignment and frequency of flashes in accordance with installation specifications.

(b) Lamp voltage shall be tested when installed and at least once every 12 months thereafter.

(c) Each flashing light unit shall be inspected for proper visibility, dirt and damage to roundels and reflectors at least once each month.

§ 234.255 Gate arm and gate mechanism.

(a) Each gate arm and gate mechanism shall be inspected at least once each month.

(b) Gate arm movement shall be observed for proper operation at least once each month.

(c) Hold-clear devices shall be tested for proper operation at least once every 12 months.

§ 234.257 Warning system operation.

(a) Each highway-rail crossing warning system shall be tested to determine that it functions as intended when it is placed in service. Thereafter, it shall be tested at least once each month and whenever modified or disarranged.

(b) Warning bells or other stationary audible warning devices shall be tested when installed to determine that they function as intended. Thereafter, they shall be tested at least once each month and whenever modified or disarranged.

§ 234.259 Warning time.

Each crossing warning system shall be tested for the prescribed warning time at least once every 12 months and when the warning system is modified because of a change in train speeds. Electronic devices that accurately determine actual warning time may be used in performing such tests.

§ 234.261 Highway traffic signal pre-emption.

Highway traffic signal pre-emption interconnections, for which a railroad has maintenance responsibility, shall be tested at least once each month.

§ 234.263 Relays.

(a) Except as stated in paragraph (b) of this section, each relay that affects the proper functioning of a crossing warning system shall be tested at least once every four years.

(b) (1) Alternating current vane type relays, direct current polar type relays, and relays with soft iron magnetic structure shall be tested at least once every two years.

(2) Alternating current centrifugal type relays shall be tested at least once every 12 months.

(c) Testing of relays requiring testing on four year intervals shall be completed in accordance with the following schedule:

(1) Not less than 50% by the end of calendar year 1996;

(2) Not less than a total of 75% by the end of calendar year 1997; and

(3) One hundred percent by the end of calendar year 1998.

(d) Testing of relays requiring testing on two year intervals shall be completed by the end of calendar year 1996.

§ 234.265 Timing relays and timing devices.

Each timing relay and timing device shall be tested at least once every twelve months. The timing shall be maintained at not less than 90 percent nor more than 110 percent of the 41 predetermined time interval. The predetermined time interval shall be shown on the plans or marked on the timing relay or timing device. Timing devices which perform internal functions associated with motion detectors, motion sensors, and grade crossing predictors are not subject to the requirements of this section.

§ 234.267 Insulation resistance tests, wires in trunking and cables.

(a) Insulation resistance tests shall be made when wires or cables are installed and at least once every ten years thereafter.

(b) Insulation resistance tests shall be made between all conductors and ground, between conductors in each multiple conductor cable, and between conductors in trunking. Insulation resistance tests shall be performed when wires, cables, and insulation are dry.

(c) Subject to paragraph (d) of this section, when insulation resistance of wire or cable is found to be less than 500,000 ohms, prompt action shall be taken to repair or replace the defective wire or cable. Until such defective wire or cable is replaced, insulation resistance tests shall be made annually.

(d) A circuit with a conductor having an insulation resistance of less than 200,000 ohms shall not be used.

(e) Required insulation resistance testing that does not conform to the required testing schedule of this section shall be completed in accordance with the following schedule:

(1) Not less than 50% by the end of calendar year 1996;

(2) Not less than a total of 75% by the end of calendar year 1997; and

(3) One hundred percent by the end of calendar year 1998.

§ 234.269 Cut-out circuits.

Each cut-out circuit shall be tested at least once every three months to determine that the circuit functions as intended. For purposes of this section, a cut-out circuit is any circuit which overrides the operation of automatic warning systems. This includes both switch cut-out circuits and devices which enable personnel to manually override the operation of automatic warning systems.

§ 234.271 Insulated rail joints, bond wires, and track connections.

Insulated rail joints, bond wires, and track connections shall be inspected at least once every three months.

§ 234.273 Results of inspections and tests.

(a) Results of inspections and tests made in compliance with this part shall be recorded on forms provided by the railroad, or by electronic means, subject to approval by the Associate Administrator for Safety. Each record shall show the name of the railroad, AAR/DOT inventory number, place and date, equipment tested, results of tests, repairs, replacements, adjustments made, and condition in which the apparatus was left.

(b) Each record shall be signed or electronically coded by the employee making the test and shall be filed in the office of a supervisory official having jurisdiction. Records required to be kept shall be made available to FRA as provided by 49 U.S.C. 20107 (formerly § 208 of the Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970 (45 U.S.C. 437)).

(c) Each record shall be retained until the next record for that test is filed but in no case for less than one year from the date of the test.

Requirements for Processor-Based Systems

§ 234.275 Processor-based systems.

(a) Applicable definitions.  The definitions in § 236.903 of this chapter shall apply to this section, where applicable.

(b) Use of performance standard authorized or required. (1) In lieu of compliance with the requirements of this subpart, a railroad may elect to qualify an existing processor-based product under part 236, subparts H or I, of this chapter.

(2) Highway-rail grade crossing warning systems, subsystems, or components that are processor-based and that are first placed in service after June 6, 2005, which contain new or novel technology, or which provide safety-critical data to a railroad signal or train control system that is governed by part 236, subpart H or I, of this chapter, shall also comply with those requirements. New or novel technology refers to a technology not previously recognized for use as of March 7, 2005.

(3) Products designed in accordance with subparts A through D of this part, which are not in service but are in the developmental stage prior to December 5, 2005 (or for which a request for exclusion was submitted prior to June 6, 2005 pursuant to § 236.911 of this chapter), may be excluded from the requirements of part 236, subpart H of this chapter upon notification to FRA by March 6, 2006, if placed in service by December 5, 2008 (or March 7, 2008 for those products for which a request for exclusion was submitted to FRA prior to June 6, 2005). Railroads may continue to implement and use these products and components from these existing products. A railroad may at any time elect to have products that are excluded made subject to 49 CFR part 236, subpart H, by submitting a Product Safety Plan as prescribed in § 236.913 of this chapter and otherwise complying with part 236, subpart H of this chapter.

(c) Plan justifications.  The Product Safety Plan in accordance with 49 CFR 236.907—or a PTC Development Plan and PTC Safety Plan required to be filed in accordance with 49 CFR 236.1013 and 236.1015—must explain how the performance objective sought to be addressed by each of the particular requirements of this subpart is met by the product, why the objective is not relevant to the product's design, or how the safety requirements are satisfied using alternative means. Deviation from those particular requirements is authorized if an adequate explanation is provided, making reference to relevant elements of the applicable plan, and if the product satisfies the performance standard set forth in § 236.909 of this chapter. (See § 236.907(a)(14) of this chapter.)

(d) Specific requirements.  The following exclusions from the latitude provided by this section apply:

(1) Nothing in this section authorizes deviation from applicable design requirements for automated warning devices at highway-rail grade crossings in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), 2000 Millennium Edition, Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), dated December 18, 2000, including Errata #1 to MUTCD 2000 Millennium Edition dated June 14, 2001 (http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/).

(2) Nothing in this section authorizes deviation from the following requirements of this subpart:

(i) § 234.207(b) (Adjustment, repair, or replacement of a component);

(ii) § 234.209(b) (Interference with normal functioning of system);

(iii) § 234.211 (Security of warning system apparatus);

(iv) § 234.217 (Flashing light units);

(v) § 234.219 (Gate arm lights and light cable);

(vi) § 234.221 (Lamp voltage);

(vii) § 234.223 (Gate arm);

(viii) § 234.225 (Activation of warning system);

(ix) § 234.227 (Train detection apparatus)—if a train detection circuit is employed to determine the train's presence;

(x) § 234.229 (Shunting sensitivity)—if a conventional track circuit is employed;

(xi) § 234.231 (Fouling wires)—if a conventional train detection circuit is employed;

(xii) § 234.233 (Rail joints)—if a track circuit is employed;

(xiii) § 234.235 (Insulated rail joints)—if a track circuit is employed;

(xiv) § 234.237 (Reverse switch cut-out circuit); or

(xv) § 234.245 (Signs).

(e) Separate justification for other than fail-safe design.  Deviation from the requirement of § 234.203 (Control circuits) that circuits be designed on a fail-safe principle must be separately justified at the component, subsystem, and system level using the criteria of § 236.909 of this chapter.

(f) Software management control for certain systems not subject to a performance standard.  Any processor-based system, subsystem, or component subject to this part, which is not subject to the requirements of part 236, subpart H or I, of this chapter but which provides safety-critical data to a signal or train control system shall be included in the software management control plan requirements as specified in § 236.18 of this chapter.

[70 FR 72384, Dec. 5, 2005, as amended at 75 FR 2698, Jan. 15, 2010]

Subpart E—Emergency Notification Systems for Telephonic Reporting of Unsafe Conditions at Highway-Rail and Pathway Grade Crossings

Source:77 FR 35191, June 12, 2012, unless otherwise noted.

§ 234.301 Definitions.

As used in this subpart—

Answering machine   means either a device or a voicemail system that allows a telephone caller to leave a recorded message to report an unsafe condition at a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing, as described in § 234.303(c) and (d), and the railroad is able to retrieve the recorded message either remotely or on-site.

Automated answering system   means a type of answering system that directs a telephone caller to a single menu of options, where the caller has the choice to select one of the available options to report an unsafe condition at a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing, as described in § 234.303(c) and (d), and immediately after selecting one of the available menu options, the caller is transferred to a live telephone operator.

Class II   and Class III have the meaning assigned by regulations of the Surface Transportation Board (49 CFR part 1201; General Instructions 1-1), as those regulations may be revised and applied by order of the Board (including modifications in class threshold based on revenue deflator adjustments).

Dispatches a train or dispatches trains   means dispatches or otherwise provides the authority for the movement of the train or trains through a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing.

Dispatching railroad   means a railroad that dispatches or otherwise provides the authority for the movement of one or more trains through a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing.

Emergency Notification System   means a system in place by which a railroad receives, processes, and responds to telephonic reports of an unsafe condition at a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing. An Emergency Notification System includes the following components:

(1) The signs, placed and maintained at the grade crossings that display the information necessary for the public to report an unsafe condition at the grade crossing to the dispatching railroad by telephone;

(2) The method that the railroad uses to receive and process a telephone call reporting the unsafe condition;

(3) The remedial actions that a railroad takes to address the report of the unsafe condition; and

(4) The recordkeeping conducted by a railroad in response to the report of the unsafe condition at the grade crossing.

ENS   means Emergency Notification System as defined in this section.

Farm grade crossing   means a type of highway-rail grade crossing where a private roadway used for the movement of farm motor vehicles, farm machinery, or livestock in connection with agricultural pursuits, forestry, or other land-productive purposes crosses one or more railroad tracks at grade.

Highway-rail and pathway grade crossing   means a highway-rail grade crossing and a pathway grade crossing.

Highway-rail or pathway grade crossing   means either a highway-rail grade crossing or a pathway grade crossing.

Maintaining railroad   means the entity (e.g., track owner or lessee) that is responsible for maintenance of the highway-rail or pathway grade crossing warning device, or for maintenance of other aspects of the highway-rail or pathway grade crossing. If the maintenance responsibility is handled by a contractor, such as maintaining a grade crossing warning system or track structure at the highway-rail or pathway grade crossing, then the contractor is considered the “maintaining railroad” for the purposes of this subpart.

Public report of warning system malfunction or public report of warning system malfunction at a highway-rail grade crossing   means a report that contains specific information regarding a warning system malfunction at a highway-rail grade crossing that is supplied to a railroad via the ENS by a member of the public who does not belong to one of the categories of individuals listed in the definition of Credible report of warning system malfunction or credible report of warning system malfunction at a highway-rail grade crossing in § 234.5.

Third-party telephone service   means a service that receives telephonic reports of unsafe conditions at highway-rail and pathway grade crossings on behalf of a railroad. A third-party telephone service that receives reports on behalf of a dispatching railroad is the only entity between the receipt of the report from the telephone caller and the transmission of the report to the dispatching railroad. A third-party telephone service that receives reports on behalf of a maintaining railroad is the only entity between the receipt of the report from a dispatching railroad and the transmission of the report to the maintaining railroad.

Warning system failure at a pathway grade crossing   means failure of an active pathway grade crossing warning system to perform as intended.

[77 FR 35191, June 12, 2012, as amended at 85 FR 80660, Dec. 14, 2020]

§ 234.303 Emergency notification systems for telephonic reporting of unsafe conditions at highway-rail and pathway grade crossings.

(a) Duty of dispatching railroad in general.  Each railroad shall establish and maintain a toll-free telephone service by which the railroad can directly and promptly receive telephone calls from the public reporting specific information about any of the conditions listed in paragraph (c) of this section with respect to a highway-rail grade crossing and paragraph (d) of this section with respect to a pathway grade crossing through which the railroad dispatches a train, except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (e) of this section, and in § 234.306(a). The dispatching railroad shall either have a live person answer calls directly and promptly, or use an automated answering system or a third-party telephone service for the purpose of receiving reports pursuant to this section, except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section.

(b) Exceptions for certain railroads.  If a dispatching railroad operates in accordance with either of the conditions set forth in this paragraph, the railroad is not subject to the general duties stated in the last sentence of paragraph (a) of this section.

(1) If a railroad dispatches one or more trains through a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing, each of which is authorized to travel through the crossing at speeds not greater than 20 miles per hour (mph), the railroad may use an answering machine to receive calls regarding unsafe conditions at such a crossing. If using an answering machine pursuant to this paragraph, the railroad must retrieve its messages immediately prior to the start of its operations each day.

(2) If a railroad dispatches one or more trains through a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing on a seasonal or intermittent basis (e.g., tourist, biweekly service, or non-24-hour service), and any of the trains is authorized to travel through the crossing at speeds greater than 20 mph, the railroad may use an answering machine to receive calls regarding unsafe conditions at such a crossing, but only during hours of non-operation. If using an answering machine pursuant to this paragraph (b), during periods of non-operation, the railroad must retrieve its messages daily. However, the railroad must retrieve its messages immediately prior to the start of its operations for the day, and during hours of operation the dispatching railroad shall either have a live person answer calls directly and promptly, use an automated answering system, or employ a third-party telephone service, in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section, to receive reports regarding unsafe conditions at crossings through which it dispatches trains.

(c) Reportable unsafe conditions at highway-rail grade crossings.  Each railroad shall establish a service pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (e) of this section, and in § 234.306(a), to receive telephone calls regarding the following conditions with respect to a highway-rail grade crossing through which it dispatches a train:

(1) A warning system malfunction at the highway-rail grade crossing;

(2) A disabled vehicle or other obstruction blocking a railroad track at the highway-rail grade crossing;

(3) An obstruction to the view of a pedestrian or a vehicle operator for a reasonable distance in either direction of a train's approach to the highway-rail grade crossing; or

(4) Any information relating to any other unsafe condition at the highway-rail grade crossing.

(d) Reportable unsafe conditions at pathway grade crossings.  Each railroad shall establish a service pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (e) of this section, and in § 234.306(a), to receive telephone calls regarding the following conditions with respect to a pathway grade crossing through which it dispatches a train:

(1) A failure of the active warning system at the pathway grade crossing to perform as intended;

(2) An obstruction blocking a railroad track at the pathway grade crossing;

(3) An obstruction to the view of a pathway grade crossing user for a reasonable distance in either direction of a train's approach to the pathway grade crossing; or

(4) Any information relating to any other unsafe condition at the pathway grade crossing.

(e) Class II or Class III railroads.  A Class II or Class III railroad that dispatches one or more trains through a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing within an area in which the use of a non-toll-free number would not incur any additional fees for the caller than if a toll-free number were used, may use that non-toll-free number to receive calls pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section regarding each such crossing in that area.

(f) Reports not made through the ENS.  If a report of an unsafe condition at a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing is not made through the telephone service described in paragraph (a) of this section, this subpart E does not apply to that report.

§ 234.305 Remedial actions in response to reports of unsafe conditions at highway-rail and pathway grade crossings.

(a) General rule on response to credible report of warning system malfunction at a highway-rail grade crossing. (1) If a railroad receives a credible report of a warning system malfunction at a highway-rail grade crossing pursuant to § 234.303(c)(1) and the railroad has maintenance responsibility for the warning system to which the report pertains, then it shall take the appropriate action required by subpart C of this part.

(2) If a railroad receives a credible report of a warning system malfunction at a highway-rail grade crossing pursuant to § 234.303(c)(1) and the railroad has dispatching responsibility for the crossing, but does not have maintenance responsibility for the warning system to which the report pertains, it shall promptly contact all trains that are authorized to operate through the highway-rail grade crossing in an effort to notify the train crews of the reported malfunction prior to each train's arrival at the crossing. After contacting the appropriate trains, the railroad shall then promptly contact the maintaining railroad and inform it of the reported malfunction. The maintaining railroad shall then take the appropriate action required by subpart C of this part.

(b) General rule on response to public report of warning system malfunction at a highway-rail grade crossing. (1) If a railroad receives a public report of a warning system malfunction at a highway-rail grade crossing pursuant to § 234.303(c)(1) and the railroad has maintenance responsibility for the warning system to which the report pertains, the railroad shall promptly contact all trains that are authorized to operate through the highway-rail grade crossing in an effort to notify the train crews of the reported malfunction prior to each train's arrival at the crossing. After contacting the appropriate trains, the railroad shall then promptly contact the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the highway-rail grade crossing and provide the necessary information for the law enforcement agency to direct traffic or carry out other activities to maintain safety at the highway-rail grade crossing. The railroad shall then promptly investigate the report, determine the nature of the malfunction and take the appropriate action required by § 234.207.

(2) If a railroad receives a public report of a warning system malfunction at a highway-rail grade crossing warning system pursuant to § 234.303(c)(1) and the railroad does not have maintenance responsibility for the warning system at the highway-rail grade crossing, it shall promptly contact all trains that are authorized to operate through the highway-rail grade crossing to which the report pertains in an effort to notify the train crews of the reported malfunction prior to each train's arrival at the crossing. After contacting the appropriate trains, the railroad shall then promptly contact the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the highway-rail grade crossing and provide the necessary information for the law enforcement agency to direct traffic or carry out other activities to maintain safety at the highway-rail grade crossing. The railroad shall then promptly contact the maintaining railroad and inform it of the reported malfunction. The maintaining railroad shall then promptly investigate the report, determine the nature of the malfunction, and take the appropriate action required by § 234.207.

(c) General rule on response to report of warning system failure at a pathway grade crossing. (1) If a railroad receives a report of a warning system failure at a pathway grade crossing pursuant to § 234.303(d)(1) and the railroad has maintenance responsibility for the warning system to which the report pertains, the railroad shall promptly contact all trains that are authorized to operate through the pathway grade crossing in an effort to notify the train crews of the reported failure prior to each train's arrival at the crossing. After contacting the appropriate trains, the railroad shall then promptly contact the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the pathway grade crossing and provide the necessary information for the law enforcement agency to direct traffic or carry out other activities to maintain safety at the pathway grade crossing. The railroad shall then promptly investigate the report, determine the nature of the failure, and without undue delay repair the active warning system if necessary.

(2) If a railroad receives a report of warning system failure at a pathway grade crossing pursuant to § 234.303(d)(1), but does not have maintenance responsibility for the warning system to which the report pertains, the railroad shall promptly contact all trains that are authorized to operate through the pathway grade crossing to which the report pertains in an effort to notify the train crews of the reported failure prior to each train's arrival at the crossing. After contacting the appropriate trains, the railroad shall then promptly contact the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the pathway grade crossing and provide the necessary information for the law enforcement agency to direct traffic or carry out other activities to maintain safety at the pathway grade crossing. The railroad shall then promptly contact the maintaining railroad and inform it of the reported failure. The maintaining railroad shall then promptly investigate the report, determine the nature of the failure, and without undue delay repair the warning system if necessary.

(d) General rule on response to report of a disabled vehicle or other obstruction blocking a railroad track at a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing. (1) If a railroad receives a report of a disabled vehicle or other obstruction blocking a railroad track at a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing, pursuant to § 234.303(c)(2) or (d)(2), and the railroad has maintenance responsibility for the crossing to which the report pertains, the railroad shall promptly contact all trains that are authorized to operate through the crossing in an effort to notify the train crews of the reported obstruction prior to each train's arrival at the crossing. After contacting the appropriate trains, the railroad shall then promptly contact the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the crossing to provide it with the information necessary to assist in the removal of the reported track obstruction or to carry out other activities to maintain safety at the crossing. The railroad shall then promptly investigate the report, determine the nature of the obstruction, and without undue delay take the necessary action to have the obstruction removed.

(2) If a railroad receives a report of a disabled vehicle or other obstruction blocking a railroad track at a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing, pursuant to § 234.303(c)(2) or (d)(2), but does not have maintenance responsibility for the crossing to which the report pertains, the railroad shall promptly contact all trains that are authorized to operate through the crossing to which the report pertains in an effort to notify the train crews of the reported obstruction prior to each train's arrival at the crossing. After contacting the appropriate trains, the railroad shall then promptly contact the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the crossing to provide it with the information necessary to assist in the removal of the reported track obstruction or to carry out other activities to maintain safety at the crossing. The railroad shall then promptly contact the maintaining railroad and inform it of the reported obstruction. The maintaining railroad shall then promptly investigate the report, determine the nature of the obstruction, and without undue delay take the necessary action to have the obstruction removed.

(e) Special rule on contacting a train that is not required to have communication equipment.  If a railroad is not required by § 220.9 of this chapter to have a working radio or working wireless communications in each occupied controlling locomotive of its trains and the railroad receives a report pursuant to § 234.303(c)(1), (c)(2), (d)(1), or (d)(2) about a highway-rail or pathway crossing that any of the trains is authorized to operate through, the railroad shall promptly contact the occupied controlling locomotive of the train as required by paragraph (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this § 234.305 by the quickest means available consistent with § 220.13(a) of this chapter.

(f) General rule on response to report of an obstruction of view at a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing. (1) Upon receiving a report pursuant to § 234.303(c)(3) or (d)(3), the railroad, if it is both the dispatching and the maintaining railroad, shall timely investigate the report and remove the obstruction if it is lawful and feasible to do so.

(2) If the dispatching railroad is not also the maintaining railroad, it shall promptly contact the maintaining railroad, which shall timely investigate the report and remove the obstruction if it is lawful and feasible to do so.

(g) General rule on response to report of other unsafe condition at a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing.  Upon receiving a report pursuant to § 234.303(c)(4) or (d)(4) related to the maintenance of a crossbuck sign or other similar grade crossing safety device or any other unsafe condition (such as a pot hole that could cause injury or damage) not covered by paragraph (a), (b), or (c) of this § 234.305, the railroad, if it is both the dispatching and the maintaining railroad, shall timely investigate the report; and, if the railroad finds that the unsafe condition exists, it shall timely correct it if it is lawful and feasible to do so. If the dispatching railroad is not also the maintaining railroad, it shall timely inform the maintaining railroad, which shall timely investigate the report; and, if the maintaining railroad finds that the unsafe condition exists, it shall timely correct it if it is lawful and feasible to do so.

(h) General rule on a maintaining railroad's responsibilities for receiving reports of unsafe conditions at highway-rail and pathway grade crossings. (1) In general.  If the dispatching railroad is required under this section to contact the maintaining railroad, the maintaining railroad shall—

(i) Provide the dispatching railroad with sufficient contact information by which the dispatching railroad may timely contact the maintaining railroad upon receipt of a report; and

(ii) Have either a live person answer calls directly and promptly, or use an automated answering system for the purpose of receiving a call from the dispatching railroad of a report of an unsafe condition, except as provided in paragraph (h)(2) of this section.

(2) Exceptions for use of a third-party telephone service and answering machine by a maintaining railroad. (i) If a maintaining railroad is responsible for the maintenance of a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing through which a railroad dispatches one or more trains, each of which is authorized to travel through the crossing at speeds not greater than 20 mph, the maintaining railroad may use a third-party telephone service, in accordance with § 234.307, or an answering machine to receive reports from a dispatching railroad of unsafe conditions at such a crossing. If using an answering machine pursuant to this paragraph, the railroad must retrieve its messages immediately prior to the start of its operations for the day.

(ii) If a maintaining railroad is responsible for the maintenance of a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing only on a seasonal or intermittent basis (e.g., tourist, biweekly service, or non-24-hour service), the maintaining railroad may use a third-party telephone service, in accordance with § 234.307, or an answering machine to receive reports from a dispatching railroad of unsafe conditions at such a crossing. If using an answering machine pursuant to this paragraph, during periods of non-operation, the maintaining railroad must retrieve its messages daily. However, the railroad must retrieve its messages immediately prior to the start of its operations for the day, and during hours of operation the railroad shall either have a live person answer calls directly or use an automated answering system to receive reports regarding unsafe conditions at such a crossing.

§ 234.306 Multiple dispatching or maintaining railroads with respect to the same highway-rail or pathway grade crossing; appointment of responsible railroad.

(a) Duty of multiple dispatching railroads to appoint a primary dispatching railroad for the crossing. (1) Where more than one railroad dispatches a train through the same highway-rail or pathway grade crossing, the dispatching railroads for the crossing shall appoint one of the railroads to be the primary dispatching railroad for the crossing and, as such, the primary dispatching railroad for the crossing shall do the following:

(i) Provide its emergency telephone number to the railroad responsible for the placement and maintenance of the ENS sign(s) at the crossing;

(ii) Receive all reports through ENS of unsafe conditions at the crossing as required by § 234.303;

(iii) After receiving a report of an unsafe condition at the crossing, promptly contact all other railroads that dispatch trains through the crossing to warn them of the reported unsafe condition, and, as appropriate, promptly contact the maintaining railroad(s) for the crossing as required by § 234.305; and

(iv) Otherwise carry out its duties under this subpart as a dispatching railroad for the crossing, with respect to the crossing.

(2) After receiving a report of an unsafe condition at the crossing from the appointed dispatching railroad, each of the other dispatching railroad(s) to which the report pertains shall carry out the remedial action required by § 234.305 and the recordkeeping required by § 234.313.

(b) Duty of multiple maintaining railroads to appoint a railroad responsible for the placement and maintenance of the ENS sign(s). (1) Where more than one railroad maintains the same crossing, the maintaining railroads for the crossing shall appoint one of the railroads to be responsible for the placement and maintenance of the ENS sign(s) at the crossing pursuant to §§ 234.309 and 234.311.

(2) The railroad appointed under paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall display on the ENS sign(s) at the crossing the emergency telephone number of the dispatching railroad for the crossing or, if more than one railroad dispatches a train through the crossing, the emergency telephone number of the primary dispatching railroad for the crossing identified under paragraph (a) of this section.

(c) Duty of multiple maintaining railroads with respect to remedial action at the crossing.  Where there are multiple maintaining railroads for a crossing, the dispatching railroad (or, if more than one railroad dispatches a train through the crossing, the primary dispatching railroad for the crossing under paragraph (a) of this section) upon receipt of a report of an unsafe condition, shall promptly contact and inform the appropriate maintaining railroad(s) for the crossing of the reported problem. After each maintaining railroad for the crossing receives a report of an unsafe condition at the crossing that pertains to its maintenance responsibilities for the crossing, the maintaining railroad shall carry out the remedial action required by § 234.305 and the recordkeeping required by § 234.313.

§ 234.307 Use of third-party telephone service by dispatching and maintaining railroads.

(a) General use of a third-party telephone service by a dispatching railroad.  A dispatching railroad may use a third-party telephone service to receive reports of unsafe conditions at highway-rail and pathway grade crossings pursuant to § 234.303. If a dispatching railroad chooses to use a third-party telephone service, the third-party telephone service shall be reached directly and promptly by the telephone number displayed on the ENS sign pursuant to § 234.309. The third-party telephone service may use an automated answering system for the purpose of receiving such reports. The dispatching railroad shall have a live person answer calls directly and promptly from the third-party telephone service, unless permitted pursuant to § 234.303(b) to use an answering machine. The dispatching railroad shall ensure that the third-party telephone service complies with the applicable requirements of § 234.307.

(b) General use of a third-party telephone service by a maintaining railroad.  Pursuant to § 234.305(h)(2), a maintaining railroad that either maintains a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing on a seasonal or intermittent basis (e.g., tourist, biweekly service, or non-24 hours service), or a crossing through which a railroad dispatches one or more trains, each of which is authorized to travel through the crossing at speeds not greater than 20 mph, may use a third-party telephone service to receive reports of unsafe conditions at such a crossing from a dispatching railroad. The third-party telephone service may use an automated answering system for the purpose of receiving such reports. The maintaining railroad shall receive reports from the third-party telephone service by either having a live person answer calls directly and promptly, or using an answering machine. If using an answering machine pursuant to this paragraph, the railroad must use the answering machine in accordance with § 234.305(h)(2). The maintaining railroad shall ensure that the third-party telephone service complies with the applicable requirements of § 234.307.

(c) Duties of third-party telephone service in contacting dispatching and maintaining railroads.  Upon receiving a report pursuant to §§ 234.303 or 234.305, on behalf of either the dispatching railroad or maintaining railroad, respectively, the third-party telephone service shall immediately contact the railroad, and, at a minimum, provide it with the following information:

(1) The nature of the reported unsafe condition;

(2) The location of the unsafe condition, including the U.S. DOT National Crossing Inventory number for the crossing;

(3) Whether the person reporting the unsafe condition is a railroad employee, law enforcement officer, highway traffic official, or other employee of a public agency acting in an official capacity;

(4) The date and time that the report was received by the third-party telephone service; and

(5) Any additional information provided by the caller that may be useful to restore the crossing to a safe condition.

(d) Duties of railroad using third-party telephone service.  If a dispatching or maintaining railroad uses a third-party telephone service to receive reports of unsafe conditions at a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing, the railroad shall—

(1) Provide the third-party telephone service with sufficient contact information by which the third-party telephone service may immediately contact the railroad upon receipt of a report;

(2) Inform FRA in writing, before the implementation of such a service, of the railroad's intent to use a third-party telephone service, and provide FRA with contact information for the third-party telephone service and information identifying the highway-rail and pathway grade crossings about which the third-party telephone service will receive reports;

(3) Inform FRA in writing within 30 days following any changes in the use or discontinuance of a third-party telephone service; and

(4) Take appropriate action required by § 234.305, upon being contacted by the third-party telephone service about a report.

(e) Third-party telephone service and railroad responsibilities.  If a railroad uses a third-party telephone service to receive reports pursuant to §§ 234.303 or 234.305, the third-party telephone service is responsible for carrying out the duties of this section and recordkeeping duties under § 234.313, and, if applicable under § 234.315. In addition, the railroad remains responsible for any acts or omissions of the third-party telephone service it utilizes that violate the provisions of this section or the recordkeeping requirements under § 234.313, and, if applicable under § 234.315.

§ 234.309 ENS signs in general.

(a) Provision of information.  If the dispatching railroad and the maintaining railroad(s) are not the same entity, the dispatching railroad for a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing shall provide to the maintaining railroad the telephone number that is to be displayed on the ENS sign at the crossing, not later than 180 calendar days before the date that implementation of an ENS is required.

(b) Information to be displayed.  Each ENS sign located at each highway-rail or pathway grade crossing as required by § 234.311 shall display the necessary information for the dispatching railroad to receive reports of unsafe conditions at the crossing. This information, at a minimum, includes the following:

(1) The toll-free telephone number (or non-toll-free telephone number as provided for in § 234.303(e)) established to receive reports pursuant to § 234.303(a);

(2) An explanation of the purpose of the sign (e.g., “Report emergency or problem to __”); and

(3) The U.S. DOT National Crossing Inventory number assigned to that crossing.

(c) Sign size and other physical features.  Each ENS sign shall—

(1) Measure at least 12 inches wide by 9 inches high;

(2) Be retroreflective;

(3) Have legible text (i.e., letters and numerals) with a minimum character height of 1 inch for the information required in paragraph (b) of this section; and

(4) Have white text set on a blue background with a white border, except that the U.S. DOT National Crossing Inventory number may be black text set on a white rectangular background.

§ 234.311 ENS sign placement and maintenance.

(a) Number of signs at highway-rail or pathway grade crossing. (1) In general.  The maintaining railroad, or the railroad appointed pursuant to § 234.306(b), for a highway-rail or pathway grade crossing shall place and maintain a sign on each approach to the crossing that conforms to § 234.309, except as provided in paragraph (a)(2) of this section.

(2) Exceptions. (i) At a farm grade crossing, the responsible railroad shall place and maintain a minimum of one sign that conforms to § 234.309 at the crossing.

(ii) At a railroad yard, or a port or dock facility that does not meet the definition of “plant railroad” in § 234.5, the responsible railroad shall place and maintain a minimum of one sign at each vehicular entrance to the yard, or the port or dock facility in accordance with § 234.309, in lieu of placing signs at each crossing within the yard, or the port or dock facility. Each sign must be placed so that it is clearly visible to a driver of a motor vehicle located at the vehicular entrance to the yard, or the port or dock facility.

(b) Placement of sign(s). (1) Each sign required by paragraph (a) of this section must be located at the crossing, except as provided in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section, and maintained by the responsible railroad so that the sign—

(i) Is conspicuous to users of the roadway or pathway by day and night;

(ii) Does not obstruct any other sign or traffic control device at the crossing;

(iii) Does not limit the view of a train approaching the highway-rail or pathway grade crossing; and

(iv) If mounted on a post, has supports that are crashworthy (i.e., breakaway or yielding).

(2) A sign placed on the signal bungalow does not comply with paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section.

(c) Repair or replacement of ENS sign.  If an ENS sign required by this subpart is discovered by the responsible railroad to be missing, damaged, or in any other way unusable to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, the responsible railroad shall repair or replace the sign no later than 30 calendar days from the time of detection.

[77 FR 35191, June 12, 2012, as amended at 78 FR 16423, Mar. 15, 2013]

§ 234.313 Recordkeeping.

(a) In general.  Each railroad subject to this subpart shall keep records in accordance with this section. Records may be kept either on paper forms provided by the railroad or by electronic means in a manner that conforms with § 234.315. Each dispatching railroad responsible for receiving reports pursuant to § 234.303(a), each third-party telephone service responsible for receiving reports pursuant to § 234.307, and, if applicable, each maintaining railroad shall keep, at a minimum, the following information for each report received under this subpart:

(1) The nature of the reported unsafe condition;

(2) The location of the highway-rail or pathway grade crossing, by highway name, if applicable, and the U.S. DOT National Crossing Inventory number.

(3) The time and date of receipt of the report by the railroad;

(4) If applicable, whether the person who provided the report was a railroad employee, law enforcement officer, highway traffic official, or other employee of a public agency acting in an official capacity;

(5) Actions taken by the railroad prior to resolving the reported unsafe condition at the grade crossing (e.g., warning train crews, notifying the maintaining railroad, or contacting law enforcement or other public authorities);

(6) If the reported unsafe condition is substantiated, actions taken by the railroad to remedy the reported unsafe condition, if lawful and feasible;

(7) The time and date when the reported unsafe condition was remedied;

(8) If no remedial action was taken, the reason why; and

(9) If a dispatching railroad, in accordance with § 234.305, is required to contact a maintaining railroad, the time and date when it contacted the maintaining railroad.

(b) Records of credible reports of warning system malfunction.  A railroad that has maintenance responsibility over warning devices at a highway-rail grade crossing and maintains records pursuant to § 234.109, shall be deemed to comply with the recordkeeping requirements of this subpart with regard to credible reports of warning system malfunctions.

(c) Records involving multiple dispatching or maintaining railroads. (1) Where multiple railroads dispatch trains through the same highway-rail or pathway grade crossing and appoint one railroad to receive telephonic reports regarding unsafe conditions at such crossings pursuant to § 234.306, the appointment must be recorded in writing and a copy of the document retained by each railroad for the duration of the appointment or for one year, whichever period is longer.

(2) Where multiple railroads have maintenance responsibility for the same highway-rail or pathway grade crossing and they appoint one railroad to be responsible for installing and maintaining the ENS sign(s) at the crossing pursuant to § 234.306, the appointment must be recorded in writing and a copy of the document retained by each railroad for the duration of the appointment or for one year, whichever period is longer.

(d) Record retention period; records availability.  Each railroad shall retain for at least one year (from the latest date of railroad activity in response to a report received under this subpart) all records referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section. Records required to be kept under this subpart shall be made available to FRA as provided by 49 U.S.C. 20107.

§ 234.315 Electronic recordkeeping.

(a) If a railroad subject to this subpart maintains records required by this subpart in electronic format in lieu of on paper, the system for keeping the electronic records must meet all of the following conditions:

(1) The railroad adequately limits and controls accessibility to the records retained in its electronic database system and identifies those individuals who have such access;

(2) The railroad has a terminal at the location designated by the railroad as the general office for the railroad system and at each division headquarters;

(3) Each such terminal has a computer and either a facsimile machine or a printer connected to the computer to retrieve and produce information in a usable format for immediate review by FRA representatives;

(4) The railroad has a designated representative who is authorized to authenticate retrieved information from the electronic system as a true and accurate copy of the electronically kept record; and

(5) The railroad provides FRA representatives with immediate access to the record(s) for inspection and copying during normal business hours and provides a printout of such record(s) upon request.

(b) If a record required by this subpart is in the form of an electronic record kept by an electronic recordkeeping system that does not comply with paragraph (a) of this section, then the record must be kept on paper.

§ 234.317 Compliance dates.

(a) Railroads without an ENS of any kind.  If a railroad subject to this subpart does not have an ENS of any kind in place on August 13, 2012, the railroad shall implement an ENS that conforms to this subpart no later than September 1, 2015.

(b) Railroads with nonconforming ENS telephone service.  If a railroad subject to this subpart already has its own ENS telephone service or is using a third-party ENS telephone service, and that telephone service does not conform to the requirements in § 234.303 or § 234.307, respectively, on August 13, 2012, the railroad shall comply with this subpart no later than March 1, 2014, pursuant to the exceptions in paragraphs (c), (d), and (e) of § 234.317.

(c) Railroads with ENS signs of nonconforming size. (1) If a railroad subject to this subpart already has ENS signs in place, and those signs do not conform to the requirements in § 234.309 on August 13, 2012, the railroad's ENS signs shall conform to § 234.309 no later than as required below:

(i) If the railroad's sign size is greater than or equal to 60 square inches and the height of the lettering on the sign is greater than or equal to 3⁄4 inch for the information required in § 234.309(b)(1) and (b)(3), and greater than or equal to 3⁄8 inch for the information required in § 234.309(b)(2) on August 13, 2012, the railroad may maintain the sign for its useful life.

(ii) If the railroad's sign size is greater than or equal to 60 square inches but the height of the lettering is either less than 3⁄4 inch for the information required in § 234.309(b)(1) and (b)(3), or less than 3⁄8 inch for the information required in § 234.309(b)(2) on August 13, 2012, the railroad's sign must conform to § 234.309 no later than September 1, 2017.

(iii) If the railroad's sign size is less than 60 square inches, regardless of the height of the lettering for the information required in § 234.309(b), on August 13, 2012, the railroad's sign must conform to § 234.309 no later than September 1, 2015.

(2) If the railroad chooses to replace an ENS sign of non-conforming size before the applicable compliance date stated, the railroad shall replace that sign with a sign that conforms to § 234.309.

(d) Railroads with ENS signs having nonconforming placement.  If a railroad subject to this subpart already has ENS signs in place, and the placement of those signs does not conform to the requirements in § 234.311 on August 13, 2012, the placement of the railroad's ENS signs shall conform to § 234.311 no later than September 1, 2017. If a railroad changes the placement of the sign before September 1, 2017, the placement of the sign must conform to § 234.311. If a railroad replaces a sign before September 1, 2017, so that the sign conforms to § 234.309, and the placement of that sign does not conform to § 234.311, the railroad shall also change the placement of the sign so that it conforms to § 234.311.

(e) Railroads with nonconforming ENS recordkeeping.  If a railroad subject to this subpart already conducts recordkeeping as part of its ENS, and that recordkeeping does not conform to § 234.313 or § 234.315, the railroad's recordkeeping shall conform to § 234.313 or § 234.315 no later than March 1, 2014.

[77 FR 35191, June 12, 2012, as amended at 78 FR 16423, Mar. 15, 2013]

Subpart F—Highway-Rail and Pathway Crossing Inventory Reporting

Source:80 FR 786, Jan. 6, 2015, unless otherwise noted.

§ 234.401 Definitions.

As used in this subpart—

Class I   has the meaning assigned by regulations of the Surface Transportation Board (49 CFR part 1201; General Instructions 1-1), as those regulations may be revised and applied by order of the Board (including modifications in class threshold based on revenue deflator adjustments).

Closed crossing   means a location where a previous crossing no longer exists because either the railroad tracks have been physically removed, or each pathway or roadway approach to the crossing has been physically removed, leaving behind no intersection of railroad tracks with either a pathway or roadway. A grade-separated highway-rail or pathway crossing that has been physically removed is also considered a closed crossing.

Crossing Inventory   means the U.S. DOT National Highway-Rail Crossing Inventory.

FRA Associate Administrator   means the FRA Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety/Chief Safety Officer.

General railroad system of transportation   means the network of standard gage track over which goods may be transported throughout the nation and passengers may travel between cities and within metropolitan and suburban areas.

General system railroad   means a railroad that operates on track which is part of the general railroad system of transportation.

Highway-rail crossing   means the location where one or more railroad tracks intersect with a public highway, road, street, or private roadway, either at-grade or grade-separated, including associated sidewalks.

Inventory Form   means the U.S. DOT Crossing Inventory Form (Form FRA F 6180.71).

Inventory Guide   means the FRA Guide for Preparing Highway-Rail Crossing Inventory Forms in effect at the time of the submission of data to the Crossing Inventory.

Inventory Number   means the number assigned to a highway-rail crossing or pathway crossing in the Crossing Inventory.

Operating railroad   means any railroad or urban rapid transit operator that operates one or more trains through a highway-rail or pathway crossing on, or connected to, the general railroad system of transportation.

Pathway crossing   means a pathway that:

(1) Is explicitly authorized by a public authority or a railroad;

(2) Is dedicated for the use of non-vehicular traffic, including pedestrians, bicyclists, and others;

(3) Is not associated with a public highway, road, or street, or a private roadway; and

(4) Crosses one or more railroad tracks either at grade or grade-separated.

Primary operating railroad   means the operating railroad that either owns or maintains the track through the highway-rail or pathway crossing, unless the crossing is located within a private company, port, or dock area. If more than one operating railroad either owns or maintains the track through the highway-rail or pathway crossing, or if no operating railroad owns or maintains the track through the highway-rail or pathway crossing, then the operating railroad that operates the highest number of trains through the crossing is the primary operating railroad. In the event that there is only one operating railroad that operates one or more trains through a highway-rail or pathway crossing, that operating railroad is the primary operating railroad. For highway-rail and pathway crossings that are located within a private company, port, or dock area (“private area”), each railroad that owns track leading to the private company, port, or dock area will be considered a primary operating railroad for all crossings within the private area if a general system railroad operates over the railroad's track leading to the private area and through at least one crossing within that area.

Private crossing   means a highway-rail or pathway crossing that is not a public crossing.

Public crossing   means a highway-rail or pathway crossing where the approaches are under the jurisdiction of and maintained by a public authority and open to public travel. All approaches must be under the jurisdiction of the public authority and no approach may be on private property, unless State law or regulation provides otherwise.

Temporary crossing   means a highway-rail or pathway crossing created to serve a specific activity for a temporary time period not to exceed six months.

[80 FR 786, Jan. 6, 2015, as amended at 81 FR 37532, June 10, 2015]

§ 234.403 Submission of data to the Crossing Inventory, generally.

(a) Highway-rail and pathway crossing data shall be submitted to the Crossing Inventory on the Inventory Form. Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, the Inventory Form may be submitted in hard copy or electronically.

(b) The Inventory Form, or its electronic equivalent, shall be completed in accordance with the Inventory Guide. A copy of this guide may be obtained from the Office of Railroad Safety, RRS-23, Federal Railroad Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590. A copy of this guide can also be viewed or downloaded from FRA's Safety Data Web site under the Forms/Publications tab.

(c) Each Class I railroad shall submit the data required by paragraph (a) of this section to the Crossing Inventory electronically.

(d) Reporting by State agencies on behalf of operating railroads.  A State agency may submit crossing data to the Crossing Inventory on behalf of an operating railroad. The State agency and the operating railroad shall provide written notice to the FRA Associate Administrator that the State agency has agreed to submit and update crossing data for all of the operating railroad's highway-rail and pathway crossings within the state.

(e) Reporting by the parent corporation on behalf of subsidiary railroads. (1) To satisfy the reporting requirements of this section, a parent corporation may submit crossing data to the Crossing Inventory on behalf of one or more of its subsidiary railroads. The parent corporation shall provide written notice to the FRA Associate Administrator that it has assumed reporting and updating responsibility for all of the subsidiary railroad's highway-rail and pathway crossings. The written notification shall include the following:

(i) A list of all subsidiary railroads for which the parent corporation will submit and update highway-rail and pathway crossing data;

(ii) A statement signed by an official of the parent corporation affirming that the parent corporation agrees to submit and update all of the highway-rail and pathway crossing data for the named subsidiary railroad(s); and

(iii) A statement that the parent corporation agrees to be subject to enforcement action for noncompliance with the reporting or updating requirements of this subpart.

(2) The parent corporation shall provide immediate written notification to the FRA Associate Administrator of any change in the list of subsidiary operating railroads for which it has assumed reporting and updating responsibility.

(3) The parent corporation shall submit the data required by paragraph (a) of this section to the Crossing Inventory electronically.

[80 FR 786, Jan. 6, 2015, as amended at 81 FR 37532, June 10, 2015]

§ 234.405 Submission of initial data to the Crossing Inventory for previously unreported crossings.

(a) Duty of primary operating railroad. (1) (i) With the exception of highway-rail and pathway crossings located in a railroad yard, passenger station, or within a private company, port, or dock area, each primary operating railroad shall assign an Inventory Number to each previously unreported highway-rail and pathway crossing through which it operates.

(ii) A primary operating railroad shall assign one or more Inventory Numbers to previously unreported highway-rail and pathway crossings through which it operates, which are located in a railroad yard, passenger station, or within a private company, port, or dock area.

(2) With the exception of highway-rail and pathway crossings that are located within a private company, port, or dock area, the primary operating railroad shall provide the assigned Inventory Number to each operating railroad that operates one or more trains through the previously unreported highway-rail or pathway crossing no later than January 6, 2016.

(3) Each primary operating railroad shall submit accurate Inventory Forms, or their electronic equivalent, to the Crossing Inventory for the previously unreported highway-rail and pathway crossings through which it operates, no later than August 9, 2016. The Inventory Form, or its electronic equivalent, shall reference the assigned Inventory Number for the crossing(s) and shall be completed and submitted consistent with § 234.403 and the Inventory Guide.

(b) Duty of operating railroad when operating railroads operate on separate tracks.  For each previously unreported highway-rail and pathway crossing where operating railroads operate trains on separate tracks through the crossing, each operating railroad (other than the primary operating railroad) shall submit accurate crossing data specified in the Inventory Guide to the Crossing Inventory no later than August 9, 2016. The Inventory Form, or its electronic equivalent, which contains this crossing data shall reference the Inventory Number assigned to the crossing by the primary operating railroad and shall be completed and submitted in accordance with § 234.403.

(c) Duty of all operating railroads.  Unless a written certification statement has been provided by the primary operating railroad in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section, each operating railroad, other than the primary operating railroad, that operates through a previously unreported highway-rail or pathway crossing (except a temporary crossing) for which a completed Inventory Form, or its electronic equivalent, has not been submitted to the Crossing Inventory in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section shall notify the FRA Associate Administrator in writing of this oversight. Written notification provided by the operating railroad shall include, at a minimum, the latitudinal and longitudinal coordinates for each previously unreported highway-rail or pathway crossing for which a completed Inventory Form, or its electronic equivalent, has not been submitted to the Crossing Inventory in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section.

(d) State-maintained crossing data.  If a primary operating railroad requests State-maintained crossing data from the appropriate State agency responsible for maintaining highway-rail and pathway crossing data, the primary operating railroad may send a copy of its written request for State-maintained crossing data to the FRA Associate Administrator and to each operating railroad that operates through the crossing. FRA will consider the written request to be an affirmative defense to potential liability for failure to timely submit an accurate Inventory Form, or its electronic equivalent, as required by paragraph (a)(3) of this section if the primary operating railroad:

(1) Provides a copy of its written request for State-maintained crossing data to the FRA Associate Administrator and to each operating railroad that operates through the crossing; and

(2) Submits the requested State-maintained crossing data to the Crossing Inventory within 60 days of receipt.

[80 FR 786, Jan. 6, 2015, as amended at 81 FR 37532, June 10, 2015]

§ 234.407 Submission of initial data to the Crossing Inventory for new crossings.

(a) Duty of primary operating railroad. (1) (i) With the exception of highway-rail and pathway crossings that are located in a railroad yard, a passenger station, or within a private company, port, or dock area, each primary operating railroad shall assign an Inventory Number to each new highway-rail and pathway crossing through which it operates.

(ii) A primary operating railroad shall assign one or more Inventory Numbers to new highway-rail and pathway crossings through which it operates, which are located in a railroad yard, passenger station, or within a private company, port, or dock area.

(iii) An Inventory Number shall not be assigned to a temporary crossing, nor shall an Inventory Form be submitted to the Crossing Inventory for a temporary crossing.

(2) With the exception of highway-rail and pathway crossings that are located within a private company, port, or dock area, the primary operating railroad shall provide the assigned Inventory Number to each operating railroad that operates one or more trains through the new highway-rail or pathway crossing no later than four (4) months after the crossing becomes operational or January 6, 2016, whichever occurs later.

(3) Each primary operating railroad shall submit accurate Inventory Forms, or their electronic equivalent, to the Crossing Inventory for new highway-rail and pathway crossings through which it operates, no later than six (6) months after the crossing becomes operational. The Inventory Form, or its electronic equivalent, shall reference the assigned Inventory Number for the crossing(s) and shall be completed and submitted in accordance with § 234.403.

(b) Duty of Operating Railroad when operating railroads operate on separate tracks.  For each new highway-rail and pathway crossing where operating railroads operate trains on separate tracks through the crossing, each operating railroad shall submit accurate crossing data specified in the Inventory Guide to the Crossing Inventory no later than six (6) months after the crossing becomes operational. The Inventory Form, or its electronic equivalent, which contains this crossing data shall reference the Inventory Number assigned to the crossing by the primary operating railroad and shall be completed and submitted consistent with § 234.403 and the Inventory Guide.

(c) Duty of all operating railroads.  Unless a written certification statement has been provided by the primary operating railroad in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section, each operating railroad, other than the primary operating railroad, that operates through a new highway-rail or pathway crossing (except a temporary crossing) for which a completed Inventory Form, or its electronic equivalent, has not been submitted to the Crossing Inventory in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section shall notify the FRA Associate Administrator in writing of this oversight. Written notification provided by the operating railroad shall include, at a minimum, the latitudinal and longitudinal coordinates for each new and unreported highway-rail or pathway crossing for which a completed Inventory Form, or its electronic equivalent, has not been submitted to the Crossing Inventory in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section.

(d) State-maintained crossing data.  If a primary operating railroad requests State-maintained crossing data from the appropriate State agency responsible for maintaining highway-rail and pathway crossing data, the primary operating railroad may send a copy of its written request for State-maintained crossing data to the FRA Associate Administrator and to each operating railroad that operates through the crossing. FRA will consider the written request to be an affirmative defense to potential liability for failure to timely submit an accurate Inventory Form, or its electronic equivalent, as required by paragraph (a)(3) of this section if the primary operating railroad:

(1) Provides a copy of its written request for State-maintained crossing data to the FRA Associate Administrator and to each operating railroad that operates through the crossing no later than six (6) months after the crossing becomes operational; and

(2) Submits the requested State-maintained crossing data to the Crossing Inventory within 60 days of receipt.

[80 FR 786, Jan. 6, 2015, as amended at 81 FR 37533, June 10, 2015]

§ 234.409 Submission of periodic updates to the Crossing Inventory.

(a) Duty of primary operating railroad.  Each primary operating railroad shall submit up-to-date and accurate crossing data to the Crossing Inventory for each highway-rail and pathway crossing (except for a grade-separated or closed highway-rail or pathway crossing) through which it operates, consistent with the Inventory Guide. Updated crossing data shall be submitted to the Crossing Inventory at least every three (3) years from the date of the most recent submission of data by the primary operating railroad (or on behalf of the primary operating railroad) for the crossing or August 9, 2016, whichever occurs later. For hard-copy submissions to Crossing Inventory, this three-year period shall be measured from mailing date of the most recent submission of data by the primary operating railroad (or on behalf of the primary operating railroad).

(b) Duty of operating railroad when operating railroads operate on separate tracks.  For each highway-rail and pathway crossing where operating railroads operate trains on separate tracks through the crossing, each operating railroad shall submit up-to-date and accurate crossing data for certain specified data fields on the Inventory Form, or its electronic equivalent, to the Crossing Inventory at least every three (3) years from the date of the most recent submission of data by that operating railroad (or on behalf of that operating railroad) for the crossing or August 9, 2016, whichever occurs later. For hard-copy submissions to Crossing Inventory, this three-year period shall be measured from mailing date of the most recent submission of data by the operating railroad (or on behalf of the operating railroad). The Inventory Form, or its electronic equivalent, shall be completed and submitted consistent with § 234.403 and the Inventory Guide.

[81 FR 37533, June 10, 2016]

§ 234.411 Changes requiring submission of updated information to the Crossing Inventory.

(a) Crossing sale. (1) If a railroad that is not a primary operating railroad sells all or part of a highway-rail or pathway crossing on or after June 10, 2016, it shall report the crossing sale to the primary operating railroad within three (3) months of the date of sale.

(2) If the primary operating railroad:

(i) Sells all or part of a highway-rail or pathway crossing on or after June 10, 2016 for which it has reporting and updating responsibility under this subpart; or

(ii) Is notified of the sale of all or part of a highway-rail or pathway crossing on or after June 10, 2016 under paragraph (a)(1) of this section, then the primary operating railroad shall submit an Inventory Form, or its electronic equivalent, which reflects the crossing sale to the Crossing Inventory consistent with § 234.403 and the Inventory Guide within three (3) months of the date of sale or three months of notification, respectively.

(b) Crossing closure.  The primary operating railroad shall report the closure of any highway-rail or pathway crossing that occurs on or after June 10, 2016 to the Crossing Inventory within three (3) months of the date on which the crossing is closed. The primary operating railroad shall submit an Inventory Form, or its electronic equivalent, that reflects closure of the crossing to the Crossing Inventory consistent with § 234.403 and the Inventory Guide.

(c) Changes in crossing characteristics. (1) The primary operating railroad shall report any change in crossing surface or change in warning device at a public highway-rail grade crossing that occurs on or after June 10, 2016 to the Crossing Inventory within three (3) months of the date of the change. The primary operating railroad shall submit an Inventory Form, or its electronic equivalent, that reflects up-to-date and accurate crossing data for the crossing (including the change in crossing surface or change in warning device) to the Crossing Inventory consistent with § 234.403 and the Inventory Guide.

(2) For purposes of this subpart, a “change in warning device” means the addition or removal of a crossbuck, yield or stop sign, flashing lights, or gates at a public highway-rail grade crossing. The installation of a crossbuck, yield or stop sign, flashing lights, or gates that will be in place for less than six months does not constitute a “change in warning device” for purposes of this subpart.

[81 FR 37533, June 10, 2016]

§ 234.413 Recordkeeping.

(a) Each railroad subject to this subpart shall keep records in accordance with this section. Records may be kept either on paper or by electronic means in a manner that conforms with § 234.415.

(b) Each operating railroad, including the primary operating railroad, responsible for submitting information to the Crossing Inventory in accordance with this subpart shall, at a minimum, maintain the following information for each required Inventory Form:

(1) A duplicate copy of each Inventory Form submitted in hard copy to the Crossing Inventory; or

(2) A copy of the electronic confirmation received from FRA after electronic submission of crossing data to the Crossing Inventory.

(c) Each railroad shall identify the locations where a copy of any record required to be retained by this subpart is accessible for inspection and photocopying by maintaining a list of such establishment locations at the office where the railroad's reporting officer conducts his or her official business.

(d) Each operating railroad shall retain for at least four (4) years from the date of submission to the Crossing Inventory all records referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section. Records required to be kept under this subpart shall be made available to FRA as provided by 49 U.S.C. 20107.

§ 234.415 Electronic recordkeeping.

(a) If a railroad subject to this subpart maintains records required by this subpart in electronic format in lieu of paper, the system for keeping the electronic records must meet all of the following conditions:

(1) The railroad adequately limits and controls accessibility to the records retained in its electronic database system and identifies those individuals who have such access;

(2) The railroad has a terminal at the office where the railroad's reporting officer conducts his or her official business and at each location designated by the railroad as having a copy of any record required to be retained by this subpart that is accessible for inspection and photocopying;

(3) Each such terminal has a computer and either a facsimile machine or a printer connected to a computer to retrieve and produce information in a usable format for immediate review by FRA representatives;

(4) The railroad has a designated representative who is authorized to authenticate retrieved information from the electronic system as a true and accurate copy of the electronically kept record; and

(5) The railroad provides FRA representatives with immediate access to the record(s) for inspection and copying during normal business hours and provides a printout of such record(s) upon request.

(b) If a record required by this subpart is in the form of an electronic record kept by an electronic recordkeeping system that does not comply with paragraph (a) of this section, then the record must be kept on paper in accordance with the recordkeeping requirements contained in § 234.413.


PART 214—RAILROAD WORKPLACE SAFETY

Authority:49 U.S.C. 20102-20103, 20107, 21301-21302, 31304; 28 U.S.C. 2461 note; and 49 CFR 1.89.

Source:57 FR 28127, June 24, 1992, unless otherwise noted.

Subpart A—General

§ 214.1 Purpose and scope.

(a) The purpose of this part is to prevent accidents and casualties to employees involved in certain railroad inspection, maintenance and construction activities.

(b) This part prescribes minimum Federal safety standards for the railroad workplace safety subjects addressed herein. This part does not restrict a railroad or railroad contractor from adopting and enforcing additional or more stringent requirements not inconsistent with this part.

§ 214.3 Application.

This part applies to railroads that operate rolling equipment on track that is part of the general railroad system of transportation.

§ 214.5 Responsibility for compliance.

Any person (an entity of any type covered under 1 U.S.C. 1, including but not limited to the following: a railroad; a manager, supervisor, official, or other employee or agent of a railroad; any owner, manufacturer, lessor, or lessee of railroad equipment, track, or facilities; any independent contractor providing goods or services to a railroad; and any employee of such owner, manufacturer, lessor, lessee, or independent contractor) who violates any requirement of this part or causes the violation of any such requirement is subject to a civil penalty of at least $1,086 and not more than $35,516 per violation, except that penalties may be assessed against individuals only for willful violations, and where a grossly negligent violation or a pattern of repeated violations has created an imminent hazard of death or injury, or has caused death or injury, a penalty not to exceed $142,063 per violation may be assessed. See FRA's website at www.fra.dot.gov for a statement of agency civil penalty policy.

[57 FR 28127, June 24, 1992]

Editorial Note

Editorial Note:

For Federal Register citations affecting § 214.5, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the Finding Aids section of the printed volume and at www.govinfo.gov.

§ 214.7 Definitions.

Unless otherwise provided, as used in this part—

Adjacent tracks   mean two or more tracks with track centers spaced less than 25 feet apart.

Anchorage   means a secure point of attachment for lifelines, lanyards or deceleration devices that is independent of the means of supporting or suspending the employee.

Body belt   means a strap that can be secured around the waist or body and attached to a lanyard, lifeline, or deceleration device.

Body harness   means a device with straps that is secured about the person in a manner so as to distribute the fall arrest forces over (at least) the thighs, shoulders, pelvis, waist, and chest and that can be attached to a lanyard, lifeline, or deceleration device.

Class I, Class II, and Class III   have the meaning assigned by, Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations part 1201, General Instructions 1-1.

Competent person   means one who is capable of identifying existing and predictable hazards in the workplace and who is authorized to take prompt corrective measures to eliminate them.

Control operator   means the railroad employee in charge of a remotely controlled switch or derail, an interlocking, or a controlled point, or a segment of controlled track.

Controlled point   means a location where signals and/or other functions of a traffic control system are controlled from the control machine.

Controlled track   means track upon which the railroad's operating rules require that all movements of trains must be authorized by a train dispatcher or a control operator.

Deceleration device   means any mechanism, including, but not limited to, rope grabs, ripstitch lanyards, specially woven lanyards, tearing or deforming lanyards, and automatic self-retracting lifelines/lanyards that serve to dissipate a substantial amount of energy during a fall arrest, or otherwise limit the energy on a person during fall arrest.

Definite train location   means a system for establishing on-track safety by providing roadway workers with information about the earliest possible time that approaching trains may pass specific locations as prescribed in § 214.331 of this part.

Designated official   means any person(s) designated by the employer to receive notification of non-complying conditions on on-track roadway maintenance machines and hi-rail vehicles.

Effective securing device   means a vandal and tamper resistant lock, keyed for application and removal only by the roadway worker(s) for whom the protection is provided. In the absence of a lock, it is acceptable to use a spike driven firmly into a switch tie or a switch point clamp to prevent the use of a manually operated switch. It is also acceptable to use portable derails secured with specifically designed metal wedges. Securing devices without a specially keyed lock shall be designed in such a manner that they require railroad track tools for installation and removal and the operating rules of the railroad must prohibit removal by employees other than the class, craft, or group of employees for whom the protection is being provided. Regardless of the type of securing device, the throwing handle or hasp of the switch or derail shall be uniquely tagged. If there is no throwing handle, the securing device shall be tagged.

Employee   means an individual who is engaged or compensated by a railroad or by a contractor to a railroad to perform any of the duties defined in this part.

Employer   means a railroad, or a contractor to a railroad, that directly engages or compensates individuals to perform any of the duties defined in this part.

Equivalent   means alternative designs, materials, or methods that the railroad or railroad contractor can demonstrate will provide equal or greater safety for employees than the means specified in this part.

Exclusive track occupancy   means a method of establishing working limits on controlled track in which movement authority of trains and other equipment is withheld by the train dispatcher or control operator, or restricted by flagmen, as prescribed in § 214.321 of this part.

Flagman   when used in relation to roadway worker safety means an employee designated by the railroad to direct or restrict the movement of trains past a point on a track to provide on-track safety for roadway workers, while engaged solely in performing that function.

Foul time   is a method of establishing working limits on controlled track in which a roadway worker is notified by the train dispatcher or control operator that no trains will operate within a specific segment of controlled track until the roadway worker reports clear of the track, as prescribed in § 214.323 of this part.

Fouling a track   means the placement of an individual or an item of equipment in such proximity to a track that the individual or equipment could be struck by a moving train or on-track equipment, or in any case is within four feet of the field side of the near running rail.

Free fall   means the act of falling before the personal fall arrest system begins to apply force to arrest the fall.

Free fall distance   means the vertical displacement of the fall arrest attachment point on a person's body harness between onset of the fall and the point at which the system begins to apply force to arrest the fall. This distance excludes deceleration distance and lifeline and lanyard elongation, but includes any deceleration device slide distance or self-retracting lifeline/lanyard extension before they operate and fall arrest forces occur.

Hi-rail vehicle   means a roadway maintenance machine that is manufactured to meet Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards and is equipped with retractable flanged wheels so that the vehicle may travel over the highway or on railroad tracks.

Hi-rail vehicle, new   means a hi-rail vehicle that is ordered after December 26, 2003 or completed after September 27, 2004.

Inaccessible track   means a method of establishing working limits on non-controlled track by physically preventing entry and movement of trains and equipment.

Individual train detection   means a procedure by which a lone worker acquires on-track safety by seeing approaching trains and leaving the track before they arrive and which may be used only under circumstances strictly defined in this part.

Informational line-up of trains   means information provided in a prescribed format to a roadway worker by the train dispatcher regarding movements of trains authorized or expected on a specific segment of track during a specific period of time.

Interlocking, manual   means an arrangement of signals and signal appliances operated from an interlocking machine and so interconnected by means of mechanical and/or electric locking that their movements must succeed each other in proper sequence, train movements over all routes being governed by signal indication.

Lanyard   means a flexible line of rope, wire rope, or strap that is used to secure a body harness to a deceleration device, lifeline, or anchorage.

Lifeline   means a component of a fall arrest system consisting of a flexible line that connects to an anchorage at one end to hang vertically (vertical lifeline) or to an anchorage at both ends to stretch horizontally (horizontal lifeline), and that serves as a means for connecting other components of a personal fall arrest system to the anchorage.

Lone worker   means an individual roadway worker who is not being afforded on-track safety by another roadway worker, who is not a member of a roadway work group, and who is not engaged in a common task with another roadway worker.

Maximum authorized speed   means the highest speed permitted for the movement of trains permanently established by timetable/special instructions, general order, or track bulletin.

Non-controlled track   means track upon which trains are permitted by railroad rule or special instruction to move without receiving authorization from a train dispatcher or control operator.

On-track roadway maintenance machine   means a self-propelled, rail-mounted, non-highway, maintenance machine whose light weight is in excess of 7,500 pounds, and whose purpose is not for the inspection of railroad track.

On-track roadway maintenance machine, existing   means any on-track roadway maintenance machine that does not meet the definition of a “new on-track roadway maintenance machine.”

On-track roadway maintenance machine, new   means an on-track roadway maintenance machine that is ordered after December 26, 2003, and completed after September 27, 2004.

On-track safety   means a state of freedom from the danger of being struck by a moving railroad train or other railroad equipment, provided by operating and safety rules that govern track occupancy by personnel, trains and on-track equipment.

On-track safety manual   means the entire set of on-track safety rules and instructions maintained together in one manual designed to prevent roadway workers from being struck by trains or other on-track equipment. These instructions include operating rules and other procedures concerning on-track safety protection and on-track safety measures.

Personal fall arrest system   means a system used to arrest the fall of a person from a working level. It consists of an anchorage, connectors, body harness, lanyard, deceleration device, lifeline, or combination of these.

Qualified   means a status attained by an employee who has successfully completed any required training for, has demonstrated proficiency in, and has been authorized by the employer to perform the duties of a particular position or function.

Railroad   means all forms of non-highway ground transportation that run on rails or electro-magnetic guideways, including (1) commuter or other short-haul rail passenger service in a metropolitan or suburban area, and (2) high-speed ground transportation systems that connect metropolitan areas, without regard to whether they use new technologies not associated with traditional railroads. Such term does not include rapid transit operations within an urban area that are not connected to the general railroad system of transportation.

Railroad bridge   means a structure supporting one or more railroad tracks above land or water with a span length of 12 feet or more measured along the track centerline. This term applies to the entire structure between the faces of the backwalls of abutments or equivalent components, regardless of the number of spans, and includes all such structures, whether of timber, stone, concrete, metal, or any combination thereof.

Railroad bridge worker or bridge worker   means any employee of, or employee of a contractor of, a railroad owning or responsible for the construction, inspection, testing, or maintenance of a bridge whose assigned duties, if performed on the bridge, include inspection, testing, maintenance, repair, construction, or reconstruction of the track, bridge structural members, operating mechanisms and water traffic control systems, or signal, communication, or train control systems integral to that bridge.

Restricted speed   means a speed that will permit a train or other equipment to stop within one-half the range of vision of the person operating the train or other equipment, but not exceeding 20 miles per hour, unless further restricted by the operating rules of the railroad.

Roadway maintenance machine   means a device powered by any means of energy other than hand power which is being used on or near railroad track for maintenance, repair, construction or inspection of track, bridges, roadway, signal, communications, or electric traction systems. Roadway maintenance machines may have road or rail wheels or may be stationary.

Roadway maintenance machines equipped with a crane   means any roadway maintenance machine equipped with a crane or boom that can hoist, lower, and horizontally move a suspended load.

Roadway work group   means two or more roadway workers organized to work together on a common task.

Roadway worker   means any employee of a railroad, or of a contractor to a railroad, whose duties include inspection, construction, maintenance or repair of railroad track, bridges, roadway, signal and communication systems, electric traction systems, roadway facilities or roadway maintenance machinery on or near track or with the potential of fouling a track, and flagmen and watchmen/lookouts as defined in this section.

Roadway worker in charge   means a roadway worker who is qualified under § 214.353 to establish on-track safety for roadway work groups, and lone workers qualified under § 214.347 to establish on-track safety for themselves.

Self-retracting lifeline/lanyard   means a deceleration device that contains a drum-wound line that may be slowly extracted from, or retracted onto, the drum under slight tension during normal employee movement, and which, after onset of a fall, automatically locks the drum and arrests the fall.

Snap-hook   means a connector comprised of a hook-shaped member with a normally closed keeper, that may be opened to permit the hook to receive an object and, when released, automatically closes to retain the object.

Train approach warning   means a method of establishing on-track safety by warning roadway workers of the approach of trains in ample time for them to move to or remain in a place of safety in accordance with the requirements of this part.

Train coordination   means a method of establishing working limits on track upon which a train holds exclusive authority to move whereby the crew of that train yields that authority to a roadway worker.

Train dispatcher   means the railroad employee assigned to control and issue orders governing the movement of trains on a specific segment of railroad track in accordance with the operating rules of the railroad that apply to that segment of track.

Watchman/lookout   means an employee who has been trained and qualified to provide warning to roadway workers of approaching trains or on-track equipment. Watchmen/lookouts shall be properly equipped to provide visual and auditory warning such as whistle, air horn, white disk, red flag, lantern, fuse. A watchman/lookout's sole duty is to look out for approaching trains/on-track equipment and provide at least fifteen seconds advanced warning to employees before arrival of trains/on-track equipment.

Working limits   means a segment of track with definite boundaries established in accordance with this part upon which trains and engines may move only as authorized by the roadway worker having control over that defined segment of track. Working limits may be established through “exclusive track occupancy,” “inaccessible track,” “foul time” or “train coordination” as defined herein.

[57 FR 28127, June 24, 1992, as amended at 61 FR 65975, Dec. 16, 1996; 67 FR 1906, Jan. 15, 2002; 68 FR 44407, July 28, 2003; 76 FR 74614, Nov. 30, 2011; 79 FR 66500, Nov. 7, 2014; 81 FR 37884, June 10, 2016]

Subpart B—Bridge Worker Safety Standards

§ 214.101 Purpose and scope.

(a) The purpose of this subpart is to prevent accidents and casualties arising from the performance of work on railroad bridges.

(b) This subpart prescribes minimum railroad safety rules for railroad employees performing work on bridges. Each railroad and railroad contractor may prescribe additional or more stringent operating rules, safety rules, and other special instructions not inconsistent with this subpart.

(c) These provisions apply to all railroad employees, railroads, and railroad contractors performing work on railroad bridges.

(d) Any working conditions involving the protection of railroad employees working on railroad bridges not within the subject matter addressed by this chapter, including respiratory protection, hazard communication, hearing protection, welding and lead exposure standards, shall be governed by the regulations of the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration.

§ 214.103 Fall protection, generally.

(a) Except as provided in paragraphs (b) through (d) of this section, when bridge workers work twelve feet or more above the ground or water surface, they shall be provided and shall use a personal fall arrest system or safety net system. All fall protection systems required by this section shall conform to the standards set forth in § 214.105 of this subpart.

(b) (1) This section shall not apply if the installation of the fall arrest system poses a greater risk than the work to be performed. In any action brought by FRA to enforce the fall protection requirements, the railroad or railroad contractor shall have the burden of proving that the installation of such device poses greater exposure to risk than performance of the work itself.

(2) This section shall not apply to bridge workers engaged in inspection of railroad bridges conducted in full compliance with the following conditions:

(i) The railroad or railroad contractor has a written program in place that requires training in, adherence to, and use of safe procedures associated with climbing techniques and procedures to be used;

(ii) The bridge worker to whom this exception applies has been trained and qualified according to that program to perform bridge inspections, has been previously and voluntarily designated to perform inspections under the provision of that program, and has accepted the designation;

(iii) The bridge worker to whom this exception applies is familiar with the appropriate climbing techniques associated with all bridge structures the bridge worker is responsible for inspecting;

(iv) The bridge worker to whom this exception applies is engaged solely in moving on or about the bridge or observing, measuring and recording the dimensions and condition of the bridge and its components; and

(v) The bridge worker to whom this section applies is provided all equipment necessary to meet the needs of safety, including any specialized alternative systems required.

(c) This section shall not apply where bridge workers are working on a railroad bridge equipped with walkways and railings of sufficient height, width, and strength to prevent a fall, so long as bridge workers do not work beyond the railings, over the side of the bridge, on ladders or other elevation devices, or where gaps or holes exist through which a body could fall. Where used in place of fall protection as provided for in § 214.105, this paragraph (c) is satisfied by:

(1) Walkways and railings meeting standards set forth in the American Railway Engineering Association's Manual for Railway Engineering; and

(2) Roadways attached to railroad bridges, provided that bridge workers on the roadway deck work or move at a distance six feet or more from the edge of the roadway deck, or from an opening through which a person could fall.

(d) This section shall not apply where bridge workers are performing repairs or inspections of a minor nature that are completed by working exclusively between the outside rails, including but not limited to, routine welding, spiking, anchoring, spot surfacing, and joint bolt replacement.

[67 FR 1906, Jan. 15, 2002]

§ 214.105 Fall protection systems standards and practices.

(a) General requirements.  All fall protection systems required by this subpart shall conform to the following:

(1) Fall protection systems shall be used only for personal fall protection.

(2) Any fall protection system subjected to impact loading shall be immediately and permanently removed from service unless fully inspected and determined by a competent person to be undamaged and suitable for reuse.

(3) All fall protection system components shall be protected from abrasions, corrosion, or any other form of deterioration.

(4) All fall protection system components shall be inspected prior to each use for wear, damage, corrosion, mildew, and other deterioration. Defective components shall be permanently removed from service.

(5) Prior to use and after any component or system is changed, bridge workers shall be trained in the application limits of the equipment, proper hook-up, anchoring and tie-off techniques, methods of use, and proper methods of equipment inspection and storage.

(6) The railroad or railroad contractor shall provide for prompt rescue of bridge workers in the event of a fall.

(7) Connectors shall have a corrosion-resistant finish, and all surfaces and edges shall be smooth to prevent damage to interfacing parts of the system.

(8) Connectors shall be drop forged, pressed or formed steel, or made of equivalent-strength materials.

(9) Anchorages, including single- and double-head anchors, shall be capable of supporting at least 5,000 pounds per bridge worker attached, or shall be designed, installed, and used under supervision of a qualified person as part of a complete personal fall protection system that maintains a safety factor of at least two.

(b) Personal fall arrest systems.  All components of a personal fall arrest system shall conform to the following standards:

(1) Lanyards and vertical lifelines that tie off one bridge worker shall have a minimum breaking strength of 5,000 pounds.

(2) Self-retracting lifelines and lanyards that automatically limit free fall distance to two feet or less shall have components capable of sustaining a minimum static tensile load of 3,000 pounds applied to the device with the lifeline or lanyard in the fully extended position.

(3) Self-retracting lifelines and lanyards that do not limit free fall distance to two feet or less, ripstitch, and tearing and deformed lanyards shall be capable of withstanding 5,000 pounds applied to the device with the lifeline or lanyard in the fully extended position.

(4) Horizontal lifelines shall be designed, installed, and used under the supervision of a competent person, as part of a complete personal fall arrest system that maintains a safety factor of at least two.

(5) Lifelines shall not be made of natural fiber rope.

(6) Body belts shall not be used as components of personal fall arrest systems.

(7) The personal fall arrest system shall limit the maximum arresting force on a bridge worker to 1,800 pounds when used with a body harness.

(8) The personal fall arrest system shall bring a bridge worker to a complete stop and limit maximum deceleration distance a bridge worker travels to 3.5 feet.

(9) The personal fall arrest system shall have sufficient strength to withstand twice the potential impact energy of a bridge worker free falling a distance of six feet, or the free fall distance permitted by the system, whichever is less.

(10) The personal fall arrest system shall be arranged so that a bridge worker cannot free fall more than six feet and cannot contact the ground or any lower horizontal surface of the bridge.

(11) Personal fall arrest systems shall be worn with the attachment point of the body harness located in the center of the wearer's back near shoulder level, or above the wearer's head.

(12) When vertical lifelines are used, each bridge worker shall be provided with a separate lifeline.

(13) Devices used to connect to a horizontal lifeline that may become a vertical lifeline shall be capable of locking in either direction.

(14) Dee-rings and snap-hooks shall be capable of sustaining a minimum tensile load of 3,600 pounds without cracking, breaking, or taking permanent deformation.

(15) Dee-rings and snap-hooks shall be capable of sustaining a minimum tensile load of 5,000 pounds.

(16) Snap-hooks shall not be connected to each other.

(17) Snap-hooks shall be dimensionally compatible with the member to which they are connected to prevent unintentional disengagement, or shall be a locking snap-hook designed to prevent unintentional disengagement.

(18) Unless of a locking type, snap-hooks shall not be engaged:

(i) Directly, next to a webbing, rope, or wire rope;

(ii) To each other;

(iii) To a dee-ring to which another snap-hook or other connector is attached;

(iv) To a horizontal lifeline; or

(v) To any object that is incompatibly shaped or dimensioned in relation to the snap-hook so that unintentional disengagement could occur.

(c) Safety net systems.  Use of safety net systems shall conform to the following standards and practices:

(1) Safety nets shall be installed as close as practicable under the walking/working surface on which bridge workers are working, but shall not be installed more than 30 feet below such surface.

(2) If the distance from the working surface to the net exceeds 30 feet, bridge workers shall be protected by personal fall arrest systems.

(3) The safety net shall be installed such that any fall from the working surface to the net is unobstructed.

(4) Except as provided in this section, safety nets and net installations shall be drop-tested at the jobsite after initial installation and before being used as a fall protection system, whenever relocated, after major repair, and at six-month intervals if left in one place. The drop-test shall consist of a 400-pound bag of sand 30 inches, plus or minus two inches, in diameter dropped into the net from the highest (but not less than 31⁄2 feet) working surface on which bridge workers are to be protected.

(i) When the railroad or railroad contractor demonstrates that a drop-test is not feasible and, as a result, the test is not performed, the railroad or railroad contractor, or designated competent person, shall certify that the net and its installation are in compliance with the provisions of this section by preparing a certification record prior to use of the net.

(ii) The certification shall include an identification of the net, the date it was determined that the net was in compliance with this section, and the signature of the person making this determination. Such person's signature shall certify that the net and its installation are in compliance with this section. The most recent certification for each net installation shall be available at the jobsite where the subject net is located.

(5) Safety nets and their installations shall be capable of absorbing an impact force equal to that produced by the drop test specified in this section.

(6) The safety net shall be installed such that there is no contact with surfaces or structures below the net when subjected to an impact force equal to the drop test specified in this section.

(7) Safety nets shall extend outward from the outermost projection of the work surface as follows:

(i) When the vertical distance from the working level to the horizontal plane of the net is 5 feet or less, the minimum required horizontal distance of the outer edge of the net beyond the edge of the working surface is 8 feet.

(ii) When the vertical distance from the working level to the horizontal plane of the net is 5 feet, but less than 10 feet, the minimum required horizontal distance of the outer edge of the net beyond the edge of the working surface is 10 feet.

(iii) When the vertical distance from the working level to the horizontal plane of the net is more than 10 feet, the minimum required horizontal distance of the outer edge of the net beyond the edge of the working surface is 13 feet.

(8) Defective nets shall not be used. Safety nets shall be inspected at least once a week for mildew, wear, damage, and other deterioration. Defective components shall be removed permanently from service.

(9) Safety nets shall be inspected after any occurrence that could affect the integrity of the safety net system.

(10) Tools, scraps, or other materials that have fallen into the safety net shall be removed as soon as possible, and at least before the next work shift.

(11) Each safety net shall have a border rope for webbing with a minimum breaking strength of 5,000 pounds.

(12) The maximum size of each safety net mesh opening shall not exceed 36 square inches and shall not be longer than 6 inches on any side measured center-to-center of mesh ropes or webbing. All mesh crossing shall be secured to prevent enlargement of the mesh opening.

(13) Connections between safety net panels shall be as strong as integral net components and shall be spaced not more than 6 inches apart.

[67 FR 1906, Jan. 15, 2002; 67 FR 11055, Mar. 12, 2002]

§ 214.107 Working over or adjacent to water.

(a) Bridge workers working over or adjacent to water with a depth of four feet or more, or where the danger of drowning exists, shall be provided and shall use life vests or buoyant work vests in compliance with U.S. Coast Guard requirements in 46 CFR 160.047, 160.052, and 160.053. Life preservers in compliance with U.S. Coast Guard requirements in 46 CFR 160.055 shall also be within ready access. This section shall not apply to bridge workers using personal fall arrest systems or safety nets that comply with this subpart or to bridge workers who are working under the provisions of § 214.103(b)(2), (c) or (d) of this subpart.

(b) Prior to each use, all flotation devices shall be inspected for defects that reduce their strength or buoyancy by designated individuals trained by the railroad or railroad contractor. Defective units shall not be used.

(c) Where life vests are required by paragraph (a) of this section, ring buoys with at least 90 feet of line shall be provided and readily available for emergency rescue operations. Distance between ring buoys shall not exceed 200 feet.

(d) Where life vests are required, at least one lifesaving skiff, inflatable boat, or equivalent device shall be immediately available. If it is determined by a competent person that environmental conditions, including weather, water speed, and terrain, merit additional protection, the skiff or boat shall be manned.

[70 FR 7050, Feb. 10, 2005]

§ 214.109 Scaffolding.

(a) Scaffolding used in connection with railroad bridge maintenance, inspection, testing, and construction shall be constructed and maintained in a safe condition and meet the following minimum requirements:

(1) Each scaffold and scaffold component, except suspension ropes and guardrail systems, but including footings and anchorage, shall be capable of supporting, without failure, its own weight and at least four times the maximum intended load applied or transmitted to that scaffold or scaffold component.

(2) Guardrail systems shall be capable of withstanding, without failure, a force of at least 200 pounds applied within two inches of the top edge, in any outward or downward direction, at any point along the top edge.

(3) Top edge height of toprails, or equivalent guardrail system member, shall be 42 inches, plus or minus three inches. Supports shall be at intervals not to exceed eight feet. Toeboards shall be a minimum of four inches in height.

(4) Midrails, screens, mesh, intermediate vertical members, solid panels, and equivalent structural members shall be capable of withstanding, without failure, a force of at least 150 pounds applied in any downward or outward direction at any point along the midrail or other member.

(5) Midrails shall be installed at a height midway between the top edge of the guardrail system and the walking/working level.

(b) Scaffolds shall not be altered or moved while they are occupied. This paragraph does not apply to vertical movements of mobile scaffolds that are designed to move vertically while occupied.

(c) An access ladder or equivalent safe access shall be provided.

(d) All exposed surfaces shall be prepared and cleared to prevent injury due to laceration, puncture, tripping, or falling hazard.

(e) All scaffold design, construction, and repair shall be completed by competent individuals trained and knowledgeable about design criteria, intended use, structural limitations, and procedures for proper repair.

(f) Manually propelled mobile ladder stands and scaffolds shall conform to the following:

(1) All manually propelled mobile ladder stands and scaffolds shall be capable of carrying the design load.

(2) All ladder stands, scaffolds, and scaffold components shall be capable of supporting, without failure, displacement, or settlement, its own weight and at least four times the maximum intended load applied or transmitted to that ladder stand, scaffold, or scaffold component.

(3) All exposed surfaces shall be free from sharp edges or burrs.

(4) The maximum work level height shall not exceed four times the minimum or least base dimensions of any mobile ladder stand or scaffold. Where the basic mobile unit does not meet this requirement, suitable outrigger frames shall be employed to achieve this least base dimension, or equivalent provisions shall be made to guy or brace the unit against tipping.

(5) The minimum platform width for any work level shall not be less than 20 inches for mobile scaffolds (towers). Ladder stands shall have a minimum step width of 16 inches. The steps of ladder stands shall be fabricated from slip resistant treads.

(6) Guardrails and midrails shall conform to the requirements listed in paragraph (a) of this section.

(7) A climbing ladder or stairway shall be provided for proper access and egress, and shall be affixed or built into the scaffold and so located that in its use it will not have a tendency to tip the scaffold.

(8) Wheels or casters shall be capable of supporting, without failure, at least four times the maximum intended load applied or transmitted to that component. All scaffold casters shall be provided with a positive wheel and/or swivel lock to prevent movement. Ladder stands shall have at least two of the four casters and shall be of the swivel type.

§ 214.111 Personal protective equipment, generally.

With the exception of foot protection, the railroad or railroad contractor shall provide and the bridge worker shall use appropriate personal protective equipment described in this subpart in all operations where there is exposure to hazardous conditions, or where this subpart indicates the need for using such equipment to reduce the hazards to railroad bridge workers. The railroad or railroad contractor shall require the use of foot protection when the potential for foot injury exists.

[67 FR 1908, Jan. 15, 2002]

§ 214.113 Head protection.

(a) Railroad bridge workers working in areas where there is a possible danger of head injury from impact, or from falling or flying objects, or from electrical shock and burns, shall be provided and shall wear protective helmets.

(b) Helmets required by this section shall conform to the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.135(b), as established by the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration.

[67 FR 1908, Jan. 15, 2002, as amended at 74 FR 25172, May 27, 2009; 81 FR 37884, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.115 Foot protection.

(a) The railroad or railroad contractor shall require railroad bridge workers to wear foot protection equipment when potential foot injury may result from impact, falling or flying objects, electrical shock or burns, or other hazardous condition.

(b) Foot protection equipment required by this section shall conform to the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.136(b), as established by the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration.

[67 FR 1908, Jan. 15, 2002, as amended at 74 FR 25172, May 27, 2009; 81 FR 37885, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.117 Eye and face protection.

(a) Railroad bridge workers shall be provided and shall wear eye and face protection equipment when potential eye or face injury may result from physical, chemical, or radiant agents.

(b) Eye and face protection equipment required by this section shall conform to the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.133(b), as established by the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration.

(c) Face and eye protection equipment required by this section shall be kept clean and in good repair. Use of equipment with structural or optical defects is prohibited.

(d) Railroad bridge workers whose vision requires the use of corrective lenses, when required by this section to wear eye protection, shall be protected by goggles or spectacles of one of the following types:

(i) Spectacles whose protective lenses provide optical correction the, frame of which includes shielding against objects reaching the wearer's eyes around the lenses;

(ii) Goggles that can be worn over corrective lenses without disturbing the adjustment of the lenses; or

(iii) Goggles that incorporate corrective lenses mounted behind the protective lenses.

[67 FR 1908, Jan. 15, 2002; 67 FR 11055, Mar. 12, 2002, as amended at 74 FR 25172, May 27, 2009; 81 FR 37885, June 10, 2016]

Subpart C—Roadway Worker Protection

Source:61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, unless otherwise noted.

§ 214.301 Purpose and scope.

(a) The purpose of this subpart is to prevent accidents and casualties caused by moving railroad cars, locomotives or roadway maintenance machines striking roadway workers or roadway maintenance machines.

(b) This subpart prescribes minimum safety standards for roadway workers. Each railroad and railroad contractor may prescribe additional or more stringent operating rules, safety rules, and other special instructions that are consistent with this subpart.

(c) This subpart prescribes safety standards related to the movement of roadway maintenance machines where such movements affect the safety of roadway workers. Except as provided for in § 214.320, this subpart does not otherwise affect movements of roadway maintenance machines that are conducted under the authority of a train dispatcher, a control operator, or the operating rules of the railroad.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 81 FR 37885, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.302 [Reserved]

§ 214.303 Railroad on-track safety programs, generally.

(a) Each railroad to which this part applies shall adopt and implement a program that will afford on-track safety to all roadway workers whose duties are performed on that railroad. Each such program shall provide for the levels of protection specified in this subpart.

(b) Each on-track safety program adopted to comply with this part shall include procedures to be used by each railroad for monitoring effectiveness of and compliance with the program.

§ 214.305 [Reserved]

§ 214.307 On-track safety programs.

(a) Each railroad subject to this part shall maintain and have in effect an on-track safety program which complies with the requirements of this subpart. New railroads must have an on-track safety program in effect by the date on which operations commence. The on-track safety program shall be retained at a railroad's system headquarters and division headquarters, and shall be made available to representatives of the FRA for inspection and copying during normal business hours. Each railroad to which this part applies is authorized to retain its program by electronic recordkeeping in accordance with §§ 217.9(g) and 217.11(c) of this chapter.

(b) Each railroad shall notify, in writing, the Associate Administrator for Safety and Chief Safety Officer, Federal Railroad Administration, RRS-15, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590, not less than one month before its on-track safety program becomes effective. The notification shall include the effective date of the program and the name, title, address and telephone number of the primary person to be contacted with regard to review of the program. This notification procedure shall also apply to subsequent changes to a railroad's on-track safety program.

(c) Upon review of a railroad's on-track safety program, the FRA Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety and Chief Safety Officer may, for cause stated, may disapprove the program. Notification of such disapproval shall be made in writing and specify the basis for the disapproval decision. If the Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety and Chief Safety Officer disapproves the program:

(1) The railroad has 35 days from the date of the written notification of such disapproval to:

(i) Amend its program and submit it to the Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety and Chief Safety Officer for approval; or

(ii) Provide a written response in support of its program to the Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety and Chief Safety Officer.

(2) FRA's Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety and Chief Safety Officer will subsequently issue a written decision either approving or disapproving the railroad's program.

(3) Failure to submit to FRA an amended program or provide a written response in accordance with this paragraph will be considered a failure to implement an on-track safety program under this subpart.

[81 FR 37885, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.309 On-track safety manual.

(a) The applicable on-track safety manual (as defined by § 214.7) shall be readily available to all roadway workers. Each roadway worker in charge responsible for the on-track safety of others, and each lone worker, shall be provided with and shall maintain a copy of the on-track safety manual.

(b) When it is impracticable for the on-track safety manual to be readily available to a lone worker, the employer shall establish provisions for such worker to have alternative access to the information in the manual.

(c) Changes to the on-track safety manual may be temporarily published in bulletins or notices. Such publications shall be retained along with the on-track safety manual until fully incorporated into the manual.

[81 FR 37885, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.311 Responsibility of employers.

(a) Each employer is responsible for the understanding and compliance by its employees with its rules and the requirements of this part.

(b) Each employer shall guarantee each employee the absolute right to challenge in good faith whether the on-track safety procedures to be applied at the job location comply with the rules of the operating railroad, and to remain clear of the track until the challenge is resolved.

(c) Each employer shall have in place a written procedure to achieve prompt and equitable resolution of challenges made in accordance with §§ 214.311(b) and 214.313(d).

§ 214.313 Responsibility of individual roadway workers.

(a) Each roadway worker is responsible for following the on-track safety rules of the railroad upon which the roadway worker is located.

(b) A roadway worker shall not foul a track except when necessary for the performance of duty.

(c) Each roadway worker is responsible to ascertain that on-track safety is being provided before fouling a track.

(d) Each roadway worker may refuse any directive to violate an on-track safety rule, and shall inform the employer in accordance with § 214.311 whenever the roadway worker makes a good faith determination that on-track safety provisions to be applied at the job location do not comply with the rules of the operating railroad.

§ 214.315 Supervision and communication.

(a) When an employer assigns a duty to a roadway worker that calls for that employee to foul a track, the employer shall provide the employee with an on-track safety job briefing that, at a minimum, includes the following:

(1) Information on the means by which on-track safety is to be provided for each track identified to be fouled;

(2) Instruction on each on-track safety procedure to be followed;

(3) Information about any adjacent tracks, on-track safety for such tracks, if required by this subpart or deemed necessary by the roadway worker in charge, and identification of any roadway maintenance machines that will foul such tracks;

(4) A discussion of the nature of the work to be performed and the characteristics of the work location to ensure compliance with this subpart; and

(5) Information on the accessibility of the roadway worker in charge and alternative procedures in the event the roadway worker in charge is no longer accessible to the members of the roadway work group.

(b) A job briefing for on-track safety shall be deemed complete only after the roadway worker(s) has acknowledged understanding of the on-track safety procedures and instructions presented.

(c) Every roadway work group whose duties require fouling a track shall have one roadway worker in charge designated by the employer to provide on-track safety for all members of the group. The designated person shall be qualified under the rules of the railroad that conducts train operations on those tracks to provide the protection necessary for on-track safety of each individual in the group. The responsible person may be designated generally, or specifically for a particular work situation.

(d) Before any member of a roadway work group fouls a track, the roadway worker in charge designated under paragraph (c) of this section shall inform each roadway worker of the on-track safety procedures to be used and followed during the performance of the work at that time and location. Each roadway worker shall again be so informed at any time the on-track safety procedures change during the work period. Such information shall be given to all roadway workers affected before the change is effective, except in cases of emergency. Any roadway workers who, because of an emergency, cannot be notified in advance shall be immediately warned to leave the fouling space and shall not return to the fouling space until on-track safety is re-established.

(e) Each lone worker shall communicate at the beginning of each duty period with a supervisor or another designated employee to receive an on-track safety job briefing and to advise of his or her planned itinerary and the procedures that he or she intends to use for on-track safety. When communication channels are disabled, the job briefing shall be conducted as soon as possible after the beginning of the work period when communications are restored.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 76 FR 74614, Nov. 30, 2011; 81 FR 37885, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.317 On-track safety procedures, generally.

(a) Each employer subject to the provisions of this part shall provide on-track safety for roadway workers by adopting a program that contains specific rules for protecting roadway workers that comply with the provisions of §§ 214.319 through 214.337.

(b) Roadway workers may walk across any track provided that they can safely be across and clear of the track before a train or other on-track equipment would arrive at the crossing point under the following circumstances:

(1) Employers shall adopt, and roadway workers shall comply with, applicable railroad safety rules governing how to determine that it is safe to cross the track before starting across;

(2) Roadway workers shall move directly and promptly across the track; and

(3) On-track safety protection is in place for all roadway workers who are actually engaged in work, including inspection, construction, maintenance or repair, and extending to carrying tools or material that restricts motion, impairs sight or hearing, or prevents an employee from detecting and moving rapidly away from an approaching train or other on-track equipment.

(c) On non-controlled track, on-track roadway maintenance machines engaged in weed spraying or snow removal may proceed under the provisions of § 214.301(c), under the following conditions:

(1) Each railroad shall establish and comply with an operating procedure for on-track snow removal and weed spray equipment to ensure that:

(i) All on-track movements in the affected area are informed of such operations;

(ii) All on-track movements shall operate at restricted speed as defined in § 214.7, except on other than yard tracks and yard switching leads, where all on-track movements shall operate prepared to stop within one-half the range of vision but not exceeding 25 mph;

(iii) A means for communication between the on-track equipment and other on-track movements is provided; and

(iv) Remotely controlled hump yard facility operations are not in effect, and kicking of cars is prohibited unless agreed to by the roadway worker in charge.

(2) Roadway workers engaged in such snow removal or weed spraying operations subject to this section shall retain an absolute right to use the provisions of § 214.327 (inaccessible track).

(3) Roadway workers assigned to work with this equipment may line switches (or derails operated via a switch stand) for the machine's movement but shall not engage in any roadway work activity unless protected by another form of on-track safety.

(4) Each roadway maintenance machine engaged in snow removal or weed spraying under this provision shall be equipped with and utilize:

(i) An operative 360-degree intermittent warning light or beacon;

(ii) Work lights, if the machine is operated during the period between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise or in dark areas such as tunnels, unless equivalent lighting is otherwise provided;

(iii) An illumination device, such as a headlight, capable of illuminating obstructions on the track ahead in the direction of travel for a distance of 300 feet under normal weather and atmospheric conditions;

(iv) A brake light activated by the application of the machine braking system, and designed to be visible for a distance of 300 feet under normal weather and atmospheric conditions; and

(v) A rearward viewing device, such as a rearview mirror.

(d) Tunnel niches or clearing bays in existence prior to April 1, 2017 that are designed to permit roadway workers to occupy a place of safety when trains or other on-track equipment pass the niche or clearing bay, but are less than four feet from the field side of the nearest rail, may continue to be used as a place of safety provided:

(1) Such niches or clearing bays are visually inspected by the roadway worker in charge or lone worker prior to making the determination that the niche or clearing bay is suitable for use as a place of safety;

(2) There is adequate sight distance to permit a roadway worker or lone worker to occupy the place of safety in the niche or clearing bay at least 15 seconds prior to the arrival of a train or other on-track equipment at the work location in accordance with §§ 214.329 and 214.337; and

(3) The roadway worker in charge or lone worker shall have the absolute right to designate a place of safety as a location other than that of a tunnel niche or clearing bay described by this paragraph (d), or to establish working limits.

[81 FR 37885, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.318 Locomotive servicing and car shop repair track areas.

(a) In lieu of the requirements of this subpart, workers (as defined by § 218.5 of this chapter) within the limits of locomotive servicing and car shop repair track areas (as both are defined by § 218.5 of this chapter) may utilize procedures established by a railroad in accordance with part 218, subpart B, of this chapter (Blue Signal Protection) to perform duties incidental to inspecting, testing, servicing, or repairing rolling equipment when those incidental duties involve fouling a track that is protected by Blue Signal Protection. A railroad utilizing Blue Signal Protection in lieu of the requirements of this subpart must have rules in effect governing the applicability of those protections to the incidental duties being performed.

(b) Paragraph (a) of this section applies to employees of a contractor to a railroad if such incidental duties are performed under the supervision of a railroad employee qualified (as defined by § 217.4 of this chapter) on the railroad's rules and procedures implementing the Blue Signal Protection requirements.

(c) Any work performed within the limits of a locomotive servicing or car shop repair track area with the potential of fouling a track which requires a person qualified under § 213.7 of this chapter to be present to inspect or supervise such work must be performed in accordance with the requirements of this subpart.

[81 FR 31886, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.319 Working limits, generally.

Working limits established on controlled track shall conform to the provisions of § 214.321 Exclusive track occupancy, § 214.323 Foul time, or § 214.325 Train coordination. Working limits established on non-controlled track shall conform to the provision of § 214.327 Inaccessible track.

(a) Working limits established under any procedure shall, in addition, conform to the following provisions:

(1) Only a roadway worker in charge who is qualified in accordance with § 214.353 shall establish or have control over working limits for the purpose of establishing on-track safety.

(2) Only one roadway worker in charge who is qualified in accordance with § 214.353 shall have control over working limits on any one segment of track.

(3) All affected roadway workers shall be notified before working limits are released for the operation of trains. Working limits shall not be released until all affected roadway workers have either left the track or have been afforded on-track safety through train approach warning in accordance with § 214.329.

(b) Each Class I or Class II railroad or each railroad providing regularly scheduled intercity or commuter rail passenger transportation that utilizes controlled track working limits as a form of on-track safety (under §§ 214.321 through 214.323) in signalized territory shall:

(1) By July 1, 2017, evaluate its on-track safety program and identify an appropriate method(s) of providing redundant signal protections for roadway work groups who depend on a train dispatcher or control operator to provide signal protection in establishing controlled track working limits. For purposes of this section, redundant signal protections means risk mitigation measures or safety redundancies adopted to ensure the proper establishment and maintenance of signal protections for controlled track working limits until such working limits are released by the roadway worker in charge. Appropriate redundant protections could include the use of various risk mitigation measures (or a combination of risk mitigation measures) such as technology, training, supervision, or operating-based procedures; or could include use of redundant signal protection, such as shunting, designed to prevent signal system-related incursions into established controlled track working limits; and

(2) By January 1, 2018, specifically identify, implement, and comply with the method(s) of providing redundant protections in its on-track safety program.

(c) Upon a railroad's request, FRA will consider an exemption from the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section for each segment of track(s) for which operations are governed by a positive train control system under part 236, subpart I, of this chapter. A request for approval to exempt a segment of track must be submitted in writing to the FRA Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety and Chief Safety Officer. The FRA Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety and Chief Safety Officer will review a railroad's submission and will notify a railroad of its approval or disapproval in writing within 90 days of FRA's receipt of a railroad's written request, and shall specify the basis for any disapproval decision.

[81 FR 37886, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.320 Roadway maintenance machine movements over signalized non-controlled track.

Working limits must be established for roadway maintenance machine movements on non-controlled track equipped with automatic block signal systems over which trains are permitted to exceed restricted speed (for purposes of this section, on-track movements prepared to stop within on-half the range of vision but not exceeding 25 mph). This section applies unless the railroad's operating rules protect the movements of roadway maintenance machines in a manner equivalent to that provided for by limiting all train and locomotive movements to restricted speed, and such equivalent level of protection is first approved in writing by FRA's Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety and Chief Safety Officer.

[81 FR 37887, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.321 Exclusive track occupancy.

Working limits established on controlled track through the use of exclusive track occupancy procedures shall comply with the following requirements:

(a) The track within working limits shall be placed under the control of one roadway worker in charge by either:

(1) Authority issued to the roadway worker in charge by the train dispatcher or control operator who controls train movements on that track,

(2) Flagmen stationed at each entrance to the track within working limits and instructed by the roadway worker in charge to permit the movement of trains and equipment into the working limits only as permitted by the roadway worker in charge, or

(3) The roadway worker in charge causing fixed signals at each entrance to the working limits to display an aspect indicating “Stop.”

(b) An authority for exclusive track occupancy given to the roadway worker in charge of the working limits shall be transmitted on a written or printed document directly, by relay through a designated employee, in a data transmission, or by oral communication, to the roadway worker in charge by the train dispatcher or control operator in charge of the track.

(1) Where authority for exclusive track occupancy is transmitted orally, the authority shall be written as received by the roadway worker in charge and repeated to the issuing employee for verification.

(2) The roadway worker in charge of the working limits shall maintain possession of the written or printed authority for exclusive track occupancy while the authority for the working limits is in effect. A data transmission of an authority displayed on an electronic screen may be used as a substitute for a written or printed document required under this paragraph. Electronic displays of authority shall comply with the requirements of § 214.322.

(3) The train dispatcher or control operator in charge of the track shall make a written or electronic record of all authorities issued to establish exclusive track occupancy.

(4) An authority shall specify a unique roadway work group number, an employee name, or a unique identifier. A railroad shall adopt procedures that require precise communication between trains and other on-track equipment and the roadway worker in charge or lone worker controlling the working limits in accordance with § 214.319. The procedures may permit communications to be made directly between a train or other on-track equipment and a roadway worker in charge or lone worker, or through a train dispatcher or control operator.

(c) The extent of working limits established through exclusive track occupancy shall be defined by one of the following physical features clearly identifiable to a locomotive engineer or other person operating a train or railroad equipment:

(1) A flagman with instructions and capability to hold all trains and equipment clear of the working limits;

(2) A fixed signal that displays an aspect indicating “Stop”;

(3) A station shown in the time-table, and identified by name with a sign, beyond which train movement is prohibited by train movement authority or the provisions of a direct train control system.

(4) A clearly identifiable milepost sign beyond which train movement is prohibited by train movement authority or the provisions of a direct train control system; or

(5) A clearly identifiable physical location prescribed by the operating rules of the railroad that trains may not pass without proper authority.

(d) Movements of trains and roadway maintenance machines within working limits established through exclusive track occupancy shall be made only under the direction of the roadway worker in charge of the working limits. Such movements shall be at restricted speed unless a higher authorized speed has been specifically authorized by the roadway worker in charge of the working limits.

(e) Working limits established by exclusive track occupancy authority may occur behind designated trains moving through the same limits in accordance with the following provisions:

(1) The authority establishing working limits will only be considered to be in effect after it is confirmed by the roadway worker in charge or lone worker that the affected train(s) have passed the point to be occupied or fouled by:

(i) Visually identifying the affected trains(s); or

(ii) Direct radio contact with a crew member of the affected train(s); or

(iii) Receiving information about the affected train from the train dispatcher or control operator.

(2) When utilizing the provisions of paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this section, a railroad's operating rules shall include procedures prohibiting the affected train(s) from making a reverse movement into or within the limits being fouled or occupied.

(3) After the roadway worker in charge or lone worker has confirmed that the affected trains(s) have passed the point to be occupied or fouled, the roadway worker in charge shall record on the authority the time of passage and engine number(s) of the affected trains(s). If the confirmation is by direct communication with the train(s), or through confirmation by the train dispatcher or control operator, the roadway worker in charge shall record the time of such confirmation and the engine number(s) of the affected trains on the authority.

(4) A separate roadway work group afforded on-track safety by the roadway worker in charge of authority limits, and that is located away from the roadway worker in charge of authority limits, shall:

(i) Occupy or foul the track only after receiving permission from the roadway worker in charge to occupy the working limits after the roadway worker charge has fulfilled the provisions of paragraph (e)(1) of this section; and

(ii) Be accompanied by an employee qualified to the level of a roadway worker in charge who shall also have a copy of the authority and who shall independently execute the required communication requirements of paragraphs (e)(1) and (3) of this section.

(5) Any subsequent train or on-track equipment movements within working limits after the passage of the affected train(s) shall be governed by paragraph (d) of this section.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 81 FR 37887 June 10, 2016]

§ 214.322 Exclusive track occupancy, electronic display.

(a) While it is in effect, all the contents of an authority electronically displayed shall be readily viewable by the roadway worker in charge that is using the authority to provide on-track safety for a roadway work group.

(b) If the electronic display device malfunctions, fails, or cannot display an authority while it is in effect, the roadway worker in charge shall either obtain a written or printed copy of the authority in accordance with § 214.321 (except that on-track roadway maintenance machine and hi-rail movements must stop) or establish another form of on-track safety without delay. In the event that a written or printed copy of the authority cannot be obtained or another form of on-track safety cannot be established after failure of an electronic display device, the roadway worker in charge shall instruct all roadway workers to stop work and occupy a place of safety and conduct an on-track safety job briefing to determine the safe course of action with the roadway work group.

(c) All authorized users of an electronic display system shall be uniquely identified to support individual accountability. A user may be a person, a process, or some other system that accesses or attempts to access an electronic display system to perform tasks or process an authority.

(d) All authorized users of an electronic display system must be authenticated prior to being granted access to such system. The system shall ensure the confidentiality and integrity of all internally stored authentication data and protect it from access by unauthorized users. The authentication scheme shall utilize algorithms approved by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), or any similarly recognized and FRA approved standards body.

(e) The integrity of all data must be ensured during transmission/reception, processing, and storage. All new electronic display systems implemented on or after July 1, 2017 shall utilize a Message Authentication Code (MAC) to ensure that all data is error free. The MAC shall utilize algorithms approved by NIST, or any similarly recognized and FRA approved standards body. Systems implemented prior to July 1, 2017 may utilize a Cyclical Redundancy Code (CRC) to ensure that all data is error free provided:

(1) The collision rate for the CRC check utilized shall be less than or equal to 1 in 232. Systems implemented prior to July 1, 2017 that do not utilize a CRC with a collision rate less than or equal to 1 in 232 must be retired or updated to utilize a MAC no later than July 1, 2018.

(2) MAC and CRC checks shall only be used to verify the accuracy of an electronic authority data message and shall not be used in an error correction reconstruction of the data. An authority must fail if the MAC or CRC checks do not match.

(f) Authorities transmitted to each electronic display device shall be retained in the device's non-volatile memory for not less than 72 hours.

(g) If any electronic display device used to obtain an authority is involved in an accident/incident that is required to be reported to FRA under part 225 of this chapter, the railroad or employer that was using the device at the time of the accident shall, to the extent possible, and to the extent consistent with the safety of life and property, preserve the data recorded by each such device for analysis by FRA. This preservation requirement permits the railroad or employer to extract and analyze such data, provided the original downloaded data file, or an unanalyzed exact copy of it, shall be retained in secure custody and shall not be utilized for analysis or any other purpose except by direction of FRA or the National Transportation Safety Board. This preservation requirement shall expire one (1) year after the date of the accident unless FRA or the National Transportation Safety Board notifies the railroad in writing that the data are desired for analysis.

(h) New electronic display systems implemented on or after July 1, 2017 shall provide Level 3 assurance as defined by NIST Special Publication 800-63-2, Electronic Authentication Guideline, “Computer Security,” August 2013. Systems implemented prior to July 1, 2017 shall provide Level 2 assurance. Systems implemented prior to July 1, 2017 that do not provide Level 2 or higher assurance must be retired, or updated to provide Level 2 assurance, no later than July 1, 2018. The incorporation by reference of this NIST Special Publication was approved by the Director of the Federal Register in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. You may obtain a copy of the incorporated document from the National Institute of Standards and Technology, 100 Bureau Drive, Stop 8930, Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930, http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-63-2.pdf. You may inspect a copy of the document at the Federal Railroad Administration, Docket Clerk, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC, or at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this material at NARA, call (202) 741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/federal_register/code_of_federal_regulations/ibr_locations.html.

(i) For purposes of complying with paragraph (h) of this section, electronic display systems may use multi-factor authentication for digital authentication of the subject.

[81 FR 37888, June 10, 2016, as amended at 87 FR 15143, Mar. 17, 2022]

§ 214.323 Foul time.

Working limits established on controlled track through the use of foul time procedures shall comply with the following requirements:

(a) Foul time may be given orally or in writing by the train dispatcher or control operator only after that employee has withheld the authority of all trains or other on-track equipment to move into or within the working limits during the foul time period.

(b) Each roadway worker in charge to whom foul time is transmitted orally shall repeat the track number or identifier, track limits and time limits of the foul time to the issuing employee for verification before the foul time becomes effective.

(c) The train dispatcher or control operator shall not permit the movement of trains or other on-track equipment into working limits protected by foul time until the roadway worker in charge who obtained the foul time has reported clear of the track.

(d) The roadway worker in charge shall not permit the movement of trains or other on-track equipment into or within working limits protected by foul time.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 81 FR 37888, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.325 Train coordination.

Working limits established on controlled track by a roadway worker in charge through the use of train coordination shall comply with the following requirements:

(a) Working limits established by train coordination shall be within the segments of track or tracks upon which only one train holds exclusive authority to move.

(b) The roadway worker who establishes working limits by train coordination shall communicate with a member of the crew of the train holding the exclusive authority to move, and shall determine that:

(1) The train is visible to the roadway worker who is establishing the working limits,

(2) The train is stopped,

(3) Further movements of the train will be made only as permitted by the roadway worker in charge of the working limits while the working limits remain in effect, and

(4) The crew of the train will not give up its exclusive authority to move until the working limits have been released to the train crew by the roadway worker in charge of the working limits.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 81 FR 37888, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.327 Inaccessible track.

(a) Working limits on non-controlled track shall be established by rendering the track within working limits physically inaccessible to trains at each possible point of entry by one of the following features:

(1) A flagman with instructions and capability to hold all trains and equipment clear of the working limits;

(2) A switch or derail aligned to prevent access to the working limits and secured with an effective securing device by the roadway worker in charge of the working limits;

(3) A discontinuity in the rail that precludes passage of trains or engines into the working limits;

(4) Working limits on controlled track that connects directly with the inaccessible track, established by the roadway worker in charge of the working limits on the inaccessible track; or

(5) A remotely controlled switch aligned to prevent access to the working limits and secured by the control operator of such remotely controlled switch by application of a locking or blocking device to the control of that switch, when:

(i) The control operator has secured the remotely controlled switch by applying a locking or blocking device to the control of the switch, and

(ii) The control operator has notified the roadway worker who has established the working limits that the requested protection has been provided, and

(iii) The control operator is not permitted to remove the locking or blocking device from the control of the switch until receiving permission to do so from the roadway worker who established the working limits.

(6) A locomotive with or without cars placed to prevent access to the working limits at one or more points of entry to the working limits, provided the following conditions are met:

(i) The roadway worker in charge who is responsible for establishing working limits communicates with a member of the crew assigned to the locomotive and determines that:

(A) The locomotive is visible to the roadway worker in charge that is establishing the working limits; and

(B) The locomotive is stopped.

(ii) Further movements of the locomotive shall be made only as permitted by the roadway worker in charge controlling the working limits;

(iii) The crew of the locomotive shall not leave the locomotive unattended or go off duty unless communication occurs with the roadway worker in charge and an alternate means of on-track safety protection has been established by the roadway worker in charge; and

(iv) Cars coupled to the locomotive on the same end and on the same track as the roadway workers shall be connected to the train line air brake system and such system shall be charged with compressed air to initiate an emergency brake application in case of unintended uncoupling. Cars coupled to the locomotive on the same track on the opposite end of the roadway workers shall have sufficient braking capability to control their movement.

(7) A railroad's procedure governing block register territory that prevents trains and other on-track equipment from occupying the track when the territory is under the control of a lone worker or roadway worker in charge. The roadway worker in charge or lone worker shall have the absolute right to render block register territory inaccessible under the other provisions of paragraph (a) of this section.

(8) Railroad operating rules that prohibit train or engine or other on-track equipment movements on a main track within yard limits or restricted limits until the train or engine or on-track equipment receives notification of any working limits in effect and prohibit the train or engine or on-track equipment from entering working limits until permission is received by the roadway worker in charge. Such working limits shall be delineated with stop signs (flags), and where speeds are in excess of restricted speed and physical characteristics permit, also with advance signs (flags).

(b) Trains and roadway maintenance machines within working limits established by means of inaccessible track shall move only under the direction of the roadway worker in charge of the working limits, and shall move at restricted speed.

(c) No operable locomotives or other items of on-track equipment, except those present or moving under the direction of the roadway worker in charge of the working limits, shall be located within working limits established by means of inaccessible track.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 81 FR 37888, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.329 Train approach warning provided by watchmen/lookouts.

Roadway workers in a roadway work group who foul any track outside of working limits shall be given warning of approaching trains by one or more watchmen/lookouts in accordance with the following provisions:

(a) Train approach warning shall be given in sufficient time to enable each roadway worker to move to and occupy a previously arranged place of safety not less than 15 seconds before a train moving at the maximum authorized speed on that track can pass the location of the roadway worker. The place of safety to be occupied upon the approach of a train may not be on a track, unless working limits are established on that track.

(b) Watchmen/lookouts assigned to provide train approach warning shall devote full attention to detecting the approach of trains and communicating a warning thereof, and shall not be assigned any other duties while functioning as watchmen/lookouts.

(c) The means used by a watchman/lookout to communicate a train approach warning shall be distinctive and shall clearly signify to all recipients of the warning that a train or other on-track equipment is approaching.

(d) Every roadway worker who depends upon train approach warning for on-track safety shall maintain a position that will enable him or her to receive a train approach warning communicated by a watchman/lookout at any time while on-track safety is provided by train approach warning.

(e) Watchmen/lookouts shall communicate train approach warnings by a means that does not require a warned employee to be looking in any particular direction at the time of the warning, and that can be detected by the warned employee regardless of noise or distraction of work.

(f) Every roadway worker who is assigned the duties of a watchman/lookout shall first be trained, qualified and designated in writing by the employer to do so in accordance with the provisions of § 214.349.

(g) Every watchman/lookout shall be provided by the employer with the equipment necessary for compliance with the on-track safety duties which the watchman/lookout will perform.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 81 FR 37889, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.331 Definite train location.

A roadway worker may establish on-track safety by using definite train location only where permitted by and in accordance with the following provisions:

(a) A Class I railroad or a commuter railroad may only use definite train location to establish on-track safety at points where such procedures were in use on January 15, 1997.

(b) Each Class I or commuter railroad shall include in its on-track safety program for approval by FRA in accordance with § 214.307 of this part a schedule for phase-out of the use of definite train location to establish on-track safety.

(c) A railroad other than a Class I or commuter railroad may use definite train location to establish on-track safety on subdivisions only where:

(1) Such procedures were in use on January 15, 1997, or

(2) The number of trains operated on the subdivision does not exceed:

(i) Three during any nine-hour period in which roadway workers are on duty, and

(ii) Four during any twelve-hour period in which roadway workers are on duty.

(d) Definite train location shall only be used to establish on-track safety according to the following provisions:

(1) Definite train location information shall be issued only by the one train dispatcher who is designated to authorize train movements over the track for which the information is provided.

(2) A definite train location list shall indicate all trains to be operated on the track for which the list is provided, during the time for which the list is effective.

(3) Trains not shown on the definite train location list shall not be operated on the track for which the list is provided, during the time for which the list is effective, until each roadway worker to whom the list has been issued has been notified of the train movement, has acknowledged the notification to the train dispatcher, and has canceled the list. A list thus canceled shall then be invalid for on-track safety.

(4) Definite train location shall not be used to establish on-track safety within the limits of a manual interlocking, or on track over which train movements are governed by a Traffic Control System or by a Manual Block System.

(5) Roadway workers using definite train location for on-track safety shall not foul a track within ten minutes before the earliest time that a train is due to depart the last station at which time is shown in approach to the roadway worker's location nor until that train has passed the location of the roadway worker.

(6) A railroad shall not permit a train to depart a location designated in a definite train location list before the time shown therein.

(7) Each roadway worker who uses definite train location to establish on-track safety must be qualified on the relevant physical characteristics of the territory for which the train location information is provided.

(e) Each on-track safety program that provides for the use of definite train location shall discontinue such use by June 12, 2017.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 81 FR 37889, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.333 Informational line-ups of trains.

(a) A railroad is permitted to include informational line-ups of trains in its on-track safety program for use only on subdivisions of that railroad upon which such procedure was in effect on March 14, 1996.

(b) Each procedure for the use of informational line-ups of trains found in an on-track safety program shall include all provisions necessary to protect roadway workers using the procedure against being struck by trains or other on-track equipment.

(c) Each on-track safety program that provides for the use of informational line-ups shall discontinue such use by June 12, 2017.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 81 FR 37889, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.335 On-track safety procedures for roadway work groups, general.

(a) No employer subject to the provisions of this part shall require or permit a roadway worker who is a member of a roadway work group to foul a track unless on-track safety is provided by either working limits, train approach warning, or definite train location in accordance with the applicable provisions of § 214.319, § 214.321, § 214.323, § 214.325, § 214.327, § 214.329, § 214.331, or § 214.336.

(b) No roadway worker who is a member of a roadway work group shall foul a track without having been informed by the roadway worker in charge of the roadway work group that on-track safety is provided.

[81 FR 37889, June 12, 2016]

§ 214.336 On-track safety procedures for certain roadway work groups and adjacent tracks.

(a) Procedures; general. (1) General rule.  Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, on-track safety is required for each adjacent controlled track when a roadway work group with at least one of the roadway workers on the ground is engaged in a common task with on-track, self-propelled equipment or coupled equipment on an occupied track. The required on-track safety shall be established through § 214.319 (Working limits, generally) or § 214.329 (Train approach warning provided by watchmen/lookouts) and as more specifically described in this section.

(2) Special circumstance arising in territories with at least three tracks, if an occupied track is between two adjacent controlled tracks.  If an occupied track has two adjacent controlled tracks, and one of these adjacent controlled tracks has one or more train or other on-track equipment movements authorized or permitted at a speed of 25 mph or less (or 40 mph or less for one or more passenger train or other passenger on-track equipment movements), and the other adjacent controlled track has one or more concurrent train or other on-track equipment movements authorized or permitted at a speed over 25 mph (or over 40 mph for one or more passenger train or other passenger on-track equipment movements), the more restrictive procedures in paragraph (b) of this section apply.

(3) Definitions.  As used in this section—

Adjacent controlled track   means a controlled track whose track center is spaced 19 feet or less from the track center of the occupied track.

Adjacent track   means a controlled or non-controlled track whose track center is spaced less than 25 feet from the track center of the occupied track.

Inter-track barrier   means a continuous barrier of a permanent or semi-permanent nature that spans the entire work area, that is at least four feet in height, and that is of sufficient strength to prevent a roadway worker from fouling the adjacent track.

Minor correction   means one or more repairs of a minor nature, including, but not limited to, welding, spiking, anchoring, hand tamping, and joint bolt replacement, that are accomplished with hand tools or handheld, hand-supported, or hand-guided power tools. The term does not include machine spiking, machine tamping, or any similarly distracting repair.

Occupied track   means a track on which on-track, self-propelled equipment or coupled equipment is authorized or permitted to be located while engaged in a common task with a roadway work group with at least one of the roadway workers on the ground.

(b) Procedures for adjacent-controlled-track movements over 25 mph (or over 40 mph if passenger movements).  If a train or other on-track equipment is authorized to move on an adjacent controlled track at a speed greater than 25 mph, or at a speed greater than 40 mph for a passenger train or other passenger on-track equipment movement, each roadway worker in the roadway work group that is affected by such movement must comply with the following procedures:

(1) Ceasing work and occupying a predetermined place of safety.  Except for the work activities as described in paragraph (e) of this section, each affected roadway worker shall, as described in Table 1 of this section, cease all on-ground work and equipment movement that is being performed on or between the rails of the occupied track or on one or both sides of the occupied track, and occupy a predetermined place of safety upon receiving either a watchman/lookout warning or, alternatively, a notification that the roadway worker in charge intends to permit one or more train or other on-track equipment movements through the working limits on the adjacent controlled track.

(2) Resuming work. (i) An affected roadway worker may resume on-ground work and equipment movement (on or between the rails of the occupied track or on one or both sides of the occupied track as described in Table 1 of this section) only after the trailing-end of all trains or other on-track equipment moving on the adjacent controlled track (for which a warning or notification has been received in accordance with paragraph (b)(1) of this section) has passed and remains ahead of that roadway worker.

(ii) If the train or other on-track equipment stops before its trailing-end has passed all of the affected roadway workers in the roadway work group, the work to be performed (on or between the rails of the occupied track or on one or both sides of the occupied track as described in Table 1 of this section) ahead of the trailing-end of the train or other on-track equipment on the adjacent controlled track may resume only—

(A) If on-track safety through train approach warning (§ 214.329) has been established on the adjacent controlled track; or

(B) After the roadway worker in charge has communicated with a member of the train crew or the on-track equipment operator and established that further movements of such train or other on-track equipment shall be made only as permitted by the roadway worker in charge.

(c) Procedures for adjacent-controlled-track movements 25 mph or less (or 40 mph or less if passenger movements).  If a train or other on-track equipment is authorized or permitted to move on an adjacent controlled track at a speed of 25 mph or less, or at a speed of 40 mph or less for a passenger train or other passenger on-track equipment movement, each roadway worker in the roadway work group that is affected by such movement must comply with the procedures listed in paragraph (b) of this section, except that equipment movement on the rails of the occupied track and on-ground work performed exclusively between the rails (i.e., not breaking the plane of the rails) of the occupied track may continue, provided that no on-ground work is performed within the areas 25 feet in front of and 25 feet behind any on-track, self-propelled equipment or coupled equipment permitted to move on the occupied track.

(d) Discretion of roadway worker in charge.  Nothing in this subpart prohibits the roadway worker in charge from establishing on-track safety on one or more adjacent tracks as he or she deems necessary consistent with both the purpose and requirements of this subpart.

(e) Exceptions to certain requirements for adjacent-controlled-track on-track safety.  No on-track safety (other than that required by paragraph (f) of this section or provided under paragraph (d) of this section) is required by paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section for an adjacent controlled track during the times that the roadway work group is exclusively performing one or more of the following work activities:

(1) On-ground work performed on a side of the occupied track meeting specified condition(s).  A roadway work group with all of its on-ground roadway workers (other than those performing work in accordance with another exception in paragraph (e) of this section) performing work while exclusively positioned on a side of the occupied track as follows and as further specified in Table 1 of this section:

(i) The side with no adjacent track;

(ii) The side with one or more adjacent tracks, the closest of which has working limits on it and no movements permitted within such working limits by the roadway worker in charge; or

(iii) The side with one or more adjacent tracks, provided that that it has an inter-track barrier between the occupied track and the closest adjacent track on that side.

(2) Maintenance or repairs performed either alongside, or within the perimeter of, a roadway maintenance machine or coupled equipment on the occupied track. (i) One or more roadway workers performing maintenance or repairs alongside a roadway maintenance machine or coupled equipment, provided that such machine or equipment would effectively prevent the worker from fouling the adjacent controlled track on the other side of such equipment, and that such maintenance or repairs are performed while positioned on a side of the occupied track as described in paragraph (e)(1)(i), (ii), or (iii) and Table 1 of this section.

(ii) One or more roadway workers on or under a roadway maintenance machine or coupled equipment performing maintenance or repairs within the perimeter of the machine or equipment, provided that no part of their person breaks the plane of the rail of the occupied track except when toward one of the sides of the occupied track as described in paragraph (e)(1)(i), (ii), or (iii) and Table 1 of this section. A boom or other equipment extending beyond the body of a roadway maintenance machine or coupled equipment toward an adjacent controlled track is not considered to be within the perimeter of the machine or coupled equipment.

(3) Work activities involving certain equipment and purposes.  One or more on-ground roadway workers engaged in a common task on an occupied track with on-track, self-propelled equipment or coupled equipment consisting exclusively of one or more of the types of equipment described in paragraphs (e)(3)(i) through (iii) of this section. If such a roadway work group (“excepted group”) is authorized or permitted to operate on the same occupied track and within the working limits of a separate roadway work group performing work that is subject to the requirements of this section (“non-excepted group”) or vice versa (i.e., a non-excepted group is authorized or permitted to operate on the same occupied track and within the working limits of an excepted group), the groups must conduct an on-track safety job briefing to determine if adjacent-controlled-track on-track safety is necessary for the excepted group. Such determination shall be made by the roadway worker in charge of the working limits; however, if the groups are in such proximity where the ability of the roadway workers in the excepted group to hear or see approaching trains and other on-track equipment is impaired by background noise, lights, sight obstructions or any other physical conditions caused by the equipment, then this exception does not apply, and adjacent-controlled-track on-track safety must be provided to both groups. This exception otherwise applies to work activities involving one or more of the following types of equipment:

(i) A hi-rail vehicle or other rail-bound vehicle (other than a catenary maintenance tower vehicle) being used for inspection or minor correction purposes, provided that such vehicle is not coupled to one or more railroad cars. In accordance with § 214.315(a), where multiple hi-rail or rail-bound vehicles being used for inspection or minor correction are engaged in a common task, the on-track safety job briefing shall include discussion of the nature of the work to be performed to determine if adjacent-controlled-track on-track safety is necessary.

(ii) An automated inspection car being used for inspection or minor correction purposes.

(iii) A catenary maintenance tower car or vehicle, provided that all of the on-ground workers engaged in the common task (other than those performing work in accordance with another exception in paragraph (e) of this section) are positioned within the gage of the occupied track for the sole purpose of applying or removing grounds.

(f) Procedures for components of roadway maintenance machines fouling an adjacent controlled track.  Except as provided for in § 214.341(c), a component of a roadway maintenance machine shall not foul an adjacent controlled track unless working limits have been established on the adjacent-controlled-track and there are no movements permitted within the working limits by the roadway worker in charge that would affect any of the roadway workers engaged in a common task with such machine.

Table 1—Summary of On-Track Safety Procedures for Certain Roadway Work Groups and Adjacent Tracks

Example number/diagram number(see figure 1)

“Side A” of the occupied track—the side from the vertical plane of the near running rail of the occupied track extending outward through to the fouling space of the adjacent controlled track (“ `No. 1' Track” or “No. 1”)

On or between the rails of the occupied track (“ 'No. 2' track” or “number 2”), where on-track Safety Is Established through Working Limits

“Side B” of the occupied track—either (1) the side with no adjacent track or (2) the side from the vertical plane of the near running rail of the occupied track extending outward through to the fouling space of the adjacent controlled track (“ 'number 3' track” or “number 3”)

Method of On-Track Safety on Side A

Requirement

Requirements

Requirements

Method of on-track safety on side B

1

Working limits or train approach warning

Upon receiving a notification or warning for movement(s) (“movement notification or warning”) for No. 1, cease work and occupy a predetermined place of safety (“PPOS”)1

Upon movement notification or warning for No. 1, cease work and occupy a PPOS, except work may continue during movement(s) on No. 1 auth'd. at 25 mph or less (or 40 mph or less for passenger train movements) if maintain 25′ spacing2

Work3 is not required to cease during movement(s) on No. 1

Not applicable (N/A), because there is no adjacent track.

2

Working limits

Upon movement notification for No. 1, cease work and occupy a PPOS. Work3 is not required to cease during movement(s) on No. 3

Upon movement notification for No. 1 or No. 3, cease work and occupy a PPOS, except work may continue during movement(s) on No. 1 or No. 3 auth'd. at 25 mph or less (or at 40 mph or less for passenger train movements) if maintain 25′ spacing2

Upon movement notification for No. 3, cease work and occupy a PPOS. Work3 is not required to cease during movement(s) on No. 1

Working limits.

3

Working limits

Upon movement notification for No. 1, cease work and occupy a PPOS. Work3 is not required to cease during movement(s) on No. 3

Upon movement notification for No. 1 or warning for No. 3, cease work and occupy a PPOS, except work may continue during movement(s) on No. 1 or No. 3 auth'd. at 25 mph or less (or at 40 mph or less for passenger train movements) if maintain 25′ spacing2

Upon movement warning for No. 3 or notification for No. 1, cease work and occupy a PPOS

Train approach warning.

4

Train approach warning

Upon movement warning for No. 1 or No. 3, cease work and occupy a PPOS

Upon movement warning for No. 1 or No. 3, cease work and occupy a PPOS, except work may continue during movement(s) on No. 1 or No. 3 auth'd. at 25 mph or less (or at 40 mph or less for passenger train movements) if maintain 25′ spacing2

Upon movement warning for No. 3 or No. 1, cease work and occupy safety PPOS

Train approach warning.

5

None, but with inter-track barrier

Work is prohibited on No. 1 and up to barrier (“Side A1”). Work is not required to cease btwn. barrier and near running rail of occupied track (“Side A2”) during movement(s) on No. 1

Work is not required to cease during movement(s) on No. 1

Work is not required to cease during movement(s) on No. 1

N/A, because there is no adjacent track.

6

None, but with inter-track barrier

Work is prohibited on Side A1. Work3 is not required to cease on Side A2 during movement(s) on No. 1 or No. 3

Work is not required to cease during movement(s) on No. 1. Upon movement notification or warning for No. 3, cease work and occupy a PPOS, except work may continue during movement(s) on No. 3 auth'd. at 25 mph or less (or at 40 mph or less for passenger trains) if maintain 25′ spacing2

Upon movement notification or warning for No. 3, cease work and occupy a PPOS. Work3 is not required to cease during movement(s) on No. 1

Working limits or train approach warning.

1 As used in the above table, a “predetermined place of safety” (or “PPOS”) means a specific location that an affected roadway worker must occupy upon receiving a watchman/lookout's warning of approaching movement(s) (“warning”) or a roadway worker in charge's (“RWIC's”) notification of pending movement(s) on an adjacent track (“notification”), as designated during the on-track safety job briefing required by § 214.315. The PPOS may not be on a track, unless the track has working limits on it and no movements permitted within such working limits by the RWIC. Thus, under these circumstances, the space between the rails of the occupied track (No. 2 in this table) may be designated as a place to remain in position or to otherwise occupy upon receiving a warning or notification. The RWIC must determine any change to a PPOS, and communicate such change to all affected roadway workers through an updated on-track safety job briefing.

2 On-ground work is prohibited in the areas 25′ in front of and 25′ behind equipment on the occupied track (No. 2), and must not break the plane of a rail on No. 2 towards a side of No. 2 unless work is permitted on that side. Note, however, that per § 214.336(a)(2), work would no longer be permitted to continue on or between the rails of the occupied track during movement(s) on an adjacent controlled track at 25 mph or less (or at 40 mph or less for passenger trains or other passenger on-track equipment movements) if there is a simultaneous movement on the other adjacent controlled track at more than 25 mph (or at more than 40 mph per hour for passenger train movements or other passenger on-track equipment movements).

3 Work that does not break the plane of the near running rail of the occupied track (No. 2) is not required to cease during such movements; work that breaks the plane of the near running rail of the occupied track may also continue: 1) during the times that work is permitted on or between the rails of the occupied track in accordance with § 214.336(c) (Procedures for adjacent-controlled-track movements 25 mph or less, or 40 mph or less for passenger train movements or other passenger on-track equipment movements); or 2) if such work is performed alongside or within the perimeter of a roadway maintenance machine or coupled equipment in accordance with § 214.336(e)(2).

[76 FR 74615, Nov. 30, 2011, as amended at 79 FR 1766, Jan. 10, 2014]

§ 214.337 On-track safety procedures for lone workers.

(a) A lone worker who fouls a track while performing routine inspection or minor correction may use individual train detection to establish on-track safety only where permitted by this section and the on-track safety program of the railroad.

(b) A lone worker retains an absolute right to use on-track safety procedures other than individual train detection if he or she deems it necessary, and to occupy a place of safety until such other form of on-track safety can be established.

(c) Individual train detection may be used to establish on-track safety only:

(1) By a lone worker who has been trained, qualified, and designated to do so by the employer in accordance with § 214.347 of this subpart;

(2) While performing routine inspection and minor correction work;

(3) On track outside the limits of a manual interlocking, a controlled point (except those consisting of signals only), or a remotely controlled hump yard facility;

(4) Where the lone worker is able to visually detect the approach of a train moving at the maximum speed authorized on that track, and move to a previously determined place of safety, not less than 15 seconds before the train would arrive at the location of the lone worker;

(5) Where no power-operated tools or roadway maintenance machines are in use within the hearing of the lone worker; and

(6) Where the ability of the lone worker to hear and see approaching trains and other on-track equipment is not impaired by background noise, lights, precipitation, fog, passing trains, or any other physical conditions.

(d) The place of safety to be occupied by a lone worker upon the approach of a train may not be on a track, unless working limits are established on that track.

(e) A lone worker using individual train detection for on-track safety while fouling a track may not occupy a position or engage in any activity that would interfere with that worker's ability to maintain a vigilant lookout for, and detect the approach of, a train moving in either direction as prescribed in this section.

(f) A lone worker who uses individual train detection to establish on-track safety shall first complete a written Statement of On-track Safety. The Statement shall designate the limits of the track for which it is prepared and the date and time for which it is valid. The statement shall show the maximum authorized speed of trains within the limits for which it is prepared, and the sight distance that provides the required warning of approaching trains. The lone worker using individual train detection to establish on-track safety shall produce the Statement of On-track Safety when requested by a representative of the Federal Railroad Administrator.

(g) Individual train detection shall not be used to provide on-track safety for a lone worker using a roadway maintenance machine, equipment, or material that cannot be readily removed by hand.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 81 FR 37889, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.339 Audible warning from trains.

(a) Each railroad shall have in effect and comply with written procedures that prescribe effective requirements for audible warning by horn and/or bell for trains and locomotives approaching any roadway workers or roadway maintenance machines that are either on the track on which the movement is occurring, or about the track if the roadway workers or roadway maintenance machines are at risk of fouling the track. At a minimum, such written procedures shall address:

(1) Initial horn warning;

(2) Subsequent warning(s); and

(3) Alternative warnings in areas where sounding the horn adversely affects roadway workers (e.g., in tunnels and terminals).

(b) Such audible warning shall not substitute for on-track safety procedures prescribed in this part.

[81 FR 37889, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.341 Roadway maintenance machines.

(a) Each employer shall include in its on-track safety program specific provisions for the safety of roadway workers who operate or work near roadway maintenance machines. Those provisions shall address:

(1) Training and qualification of operators of roadway maintenance machines.

(2) Establishment and issuance of safety procedures both for general application and for specific types of machines.

(3) Communication between machine operators and roadway workers assigned to work near or on roadway maintenance machines.

(4) Spacing between machines to prevent collisions.

(5) Space between machines and roadway workers to prevent personal injury.

(6) Maximum working and travel speeds for machines dependent upon weather, visibility, and stopping capabilities.

(b) Instructions for the safe operation of each roadway machine shall be provided and maintained with each machine large enough to carry the instruction document.

(1) No roadway worker shall operate a roadway maintenance machine without having been trained in accordance with § 214.355.

(2) No roadway worker shall operate a roadway maintenance machine without having knowledge of the safety instructions applicable to that machine. For purposes of this paragraph, the safety instructions applicable to that machine means:

(i) The manufacturer's instruction manual for that machine; or

(ii) The safety instructions developed to replace the manufacturer's safety instructions when the machine has been adapted for a specific railroad use. Such instructions shall address all aspects of the safe operation of the crane and shall be as comprehensive as the manufacturer's safety instructions they replace.

(3) No employer shall assign roadway workers to work near roadway machines unless the roadway worker has been informed of the safety procedures applicable to persons working near the roadway machines and has acknowledged full understanding.

(c) Components of roadway maintenance machines shall be kept clear of trains passing on adjacent tracks. Where operating conditions permit roadway maintenance machines to be less than four feet from the rail of an adjacent track, the on-track safety program of the railroad shall include the procedural instructions necessary to provide adequate clearance between the machine and passing trains.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 79 FR 66501, Nov. 7, 2014]

§ 214.343 Training and qualification, general.

(a) No employer shall assign an employee to perform the duties of a roadway worker, and no employee shall accept such assignment, unless that employee has received training in the on-track safety procedures associated with the assignment to be performed, and that employee has demonstrated the ability to fulfill the responsibilities for on-track safety that are required of an individual roadway worker performing that assignment.

(b) Each employer shall provide to all roadway workers in its employ initial or recurrent training once every calendar year on the on-track safety rules and procedures that they are required to follow.

(c) Except as provided for in § 214.353, railroad employees other than roadway workers, who are associated with on-track safety procedures, and whose primary duties are concerned with the movement and protection of trains, shall be trained to perform their functions related to on-track safety through the training and qualification procedures prescribed by the operating railroad for the primary position of the employee, including maintenance of records and frequency of training.

(d) Each employer of roadway workers shall maintain written or electronic records of each roadway worker qualification in effect. Each record shall include the name of the employee, the type of qualification made, and the most recent date of qualification. These records shall be kept available for inspection and photocopying by the Federal Railroad Administrator during regular business hours.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 81 FR 37889, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.345 Training for all roadway workers.

Consistent with § 214.343(b), the training of all roadway workers shall include, as a minimum, the following:

(a) Recognition of railroad tracks and understanding of the space around them within which on-track safety is required.

(b) The functions and responsibilities of various persons involved with on-track safety procedures.

(c) Proper compliance with on-track safety instructions given by persons performing or responsible for on-track safety functions.

(d) Signals given by watchmen/lookouts, and the proper procedures upon receiving a train approach warning from a lookout.

(e) The hazards associated with working on or near railroad tracks, including review of on-track safety rules and procedures.

(f) Instruction on railroad safety rules adopted to comply with § 214.317(b).

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 81 FR 37889, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.347 Training and qualification for lone workers.

Each lone worker shall be trained and qualified by the employer to establish on-track safety in accordance with the requirements of this section, and must be authorized to do so by the railroad that conducts train operations on those tracks.

(a) The training and qualification for lone workers shall include, as a minimum, consideration of the following factors:

(1) Detection of approaching trains and prompt movement to a place of safety upon their approach.

(2) Determination of the distance along the track at which trains must be visible in order to provide the prescribed warning time.

(3) Rules and procedures prescribed by the railroad for individual train detection, establishment of working limits, and definite train location.

(4) On-track safety procedures to be used in the territory on which the employee is to be qualified and permitted to work alone.

(5) Alternative means to access the information in a railroad's on-track safety manual when a lone worker's duties make it impracticable for the on-track safety manual to be readily available.

(b) Initial and periodic (as specified by § 243.201 of this chapter) qualification of a lone worker shall be evidenced by demonstrated proficiency.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 81 FR 37889, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.349 Training and qualification of watchmen/lookouts.

(a) The training and qualification for roadway workers assigned the duties of watchmen/lookouts shall include, as a minimum, consideration of the following factors:

(1) Detection and recognition of approaching trains.

(2) Effective warning of roadway workers of the approach of trains.

(3) Determination of the distance along the track at which trains must be visible in order to provide the prescribed warning time.

(4) Rules and procedures of the railroad to be used for train approach warning.

(b) Initial and periodic (as specified by § 243.201 of this chapter) qualification of a watchman/lookout shall be evidenced by demonstrated proficiency.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 81 FR 37890, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.351 Training and qualification of flagmen.

(a) The training and qualification for roadway workers assigned the duties of flagmen shall include, as a minimum, the content and application of the operating rules of the railroad pertaining to giving proper stop signals to trains and holding trains clear of working limits.

(b) Initial and periodic (as specified by § 243.201 of this chapter) qualification of a flagman shall be evidenced by demonstrated proficiency.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 81 FR 37890, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.353 Training and qualification of each roadway worker in charge.

(a) The training and qualification of each roadway worker in charge, or any other employee acting as a roadway worker in charge (e.g., a conductor or a brakeman), who provides for the on-track safety of roadway workers through establishment of working limits or the assignment and supervision of watchmen/lookouts or flagmen shall include, at a minimum:

(1) All the on-track safety training and qualification required of the roadway workers to be supervised and protected, including the railroad's procedures governing good faith challenges in §§ 214.311(b) and (c) and 214.313(d).

(2) The content and application of the operating rules of the railroad pertaining to the establishment of working limits.

(3) The content and application of the rules of the railroad pertaining to the establishment or train approach warning.

(4) The relevant physical characteristics of the territory of the railroad upon which the roadway worker is qualified.

(5) The procedures required to ensure that the roadway worker in charge of the on-track safety of group(s) of roadway workers remains immediately accessible and available to all roadway workers being protected under the working limits or other provisions of on-track safety established by the roadway worker in charge.

(b) Initial and periodic (as specified by § 243.201 of this chapter) qualification of a roadway worker in charge shall be evidenced by demonstrated proficiency.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 81 FR 37890, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.355 Training and qualification of each roadway worker in on-track safety for operators of roadway maintenance machines.

(a) The training and qualification of roadway workers who operate roadway maintenance machines shall include, as a minimum:

(1) Procedures to prevent a person from being struck by the machine when the machine is in motion or operation.

(2) Procedures to prevent any part of the machine from being struck by a train or other equipment on another track.

(3) Procedures to provide for stopping the machine short of other machines or obstructions on the track.

(4) Methods to determine safe operating procedures for each machine that the operator is expected to operate.

(b) Initial and periodic (as specified by § 243.201 of this chapter) qualification of a roadway worker to operate roadway maintenance machines shall be evidenced by demonstrated proficiency.

[61 FR 65976, Dec. 16, 1996, as amended at 81 FR 37890, June 10, 2016]

§ 214.357 Training and qualification for operators of roadway maintenance machines equipped with a crane.

(a) In addition to the general training and qualification requirements for operators of roadway maintenance machines set forth in §§ 214.341 and 214.355 of this subpart, each employer shall adopt and comply with a training and qualification program for operators of roadway maintenance machines equipped with a crane to ensure the safe operation of such machines.

(b) Each employer's training and qualification program for operators of roadway maintenance machines equipped with a crane shall require initial and periodic qualification of each operator of a roadway maintenance machine equipped with a crane and shall include:

(1) Procedures for determining that the operator has the skills to safely operate each machine the person is authorized to operate; and

(2) Procedures for determining that the operator has the knowledge to safely operate each machine the person is authorized to operate. Such procedures shall determine that either:

(i) The operator has knowledge of the safety instructions (i.e., the manufacturer's instruction manual) applicable to that machine; or

(ii) The operator has knowledge of the safety instructions developed to replace the manufacturer's safety instructions when the machine has been adapted for a specific railroad use. Such instructions shall address all aspects of the safe operation of the crane and shall be as comprehensive as the manufacturer's safety instructions they replace.

(c) Each employer shall maintain records that form the basis of the training and qualification determinations of each operator of roadway maintenance machines equipped with a crane that it employs.

(d) Availability of records: Each employer required to maintain records under this part shall make all records available for inspection and copying/photocopying to representatives of FRA, upon request during normal business hours.

(e) Training conducted by an employer in accordance with operator qualification and certification required by the Department of Labor (29 CFR 1926.1427) may be used to satisfy the training and qualification requirements of this section.

[79 FR 66501, Nov. 7, 2014]

Subpart D—On-Track Roadway Maintenance Machines and Hi-Rail Vehicles

Source:68 FR 44407, July 28, 2003, unless otherwise noted.

§ 214.501 Purpose and scope.

(a) The purpose of this subpart is to prevent accidents and casualties caused by the lawful operation of on-track roadway maintenance machines and hi-rail vehicles.

(b) This subpart prescribes minimum safety standards for on-track roadway maintenance machines and hi-rail vehicles. An employer may prescribe additional or more stringent standards that are consistent with this subpart.

(c) Any working condition that involves the protection of employees engaged in roadway maintenance duties covered by this subpart but is not within the subject matter addressed by this subpart, including employee exposure to noise, shall be governed by the regulations of the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration.

§ 214.503 Good-faith challenges; procedures for notification and resolution.

(a) An employee operating an on-track roadway maintenance machine or hi-rail vehicle shall inform the employer whenever the employee makes a good-faith determination that the machine or vehicle does not comply with FRA regulations or has a condition that inhibits its safe operation.

(b) Any employee charged with operating an on-track roadway maintenance machine or hi-rail vehicle covered by this subpart may refuse to operate the machine or vehicle if the employee makes a good-faith determination that it does not comply with the requirements of this subpart or has a condition that inhibits its safe operation. The employer shall not require the employee to operate the machine or vehicle until the challenge resulting from the good-faith determination is resolved.

(c) Each employer shall have in place and follow written procedures to assure prompt and equitable resolution of challenges resulting from good-faith determinations made in accordance with this section. The procedures shall include specific steps to be taken by the employer to investigate each good-faith challenge, as well as procedures to follow once the employer finds a challenged machine or vehicle does not comply with this subpart or is otherwise unsafe to operate. The procedures shall also include the title and location of the employer's designated official.

§ 214.505 Required environmental control and protection systems for new on-track roadway maintenance machines with enclosed cabs.

(a) With the exception of machines subject to paragraph (i) of this section, the following new on-track roadway maintenance machines shall be equipped with operative heating systems, operative air conditioning systems, and operative positive pressurized ventilation systems:

(1) Ballast regulators;

(2) Tampers;

(3) Mechanical brooms;

(4) Rotary scarifiers;

(5) Undercutters; and

(6) Functional equivalents of any of the machines identified in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(5) of this section.

(b) New on-track roadway maintenance machines, and existing on-track roadway maintenance machines specifically designated by the employer, of the types identified in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(5) of this section, or functionally equivalent thereto, shall be capable of protecting employees in the cabs of the machines from exposure to air contaminants, in accordance with 29 CFR 1910.1000.

(c) An employer shall maintain a list of new and designated existing on-track roadway maintenance machines of the types identified in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(5) of this section, or functionally equivalent thereto. The list shall be kept current and made available to the Federal Railroad Administration and other Federal and State agencies upon request.

(d) An existing roadway maintenance machine of the type identified in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(5) of this section, or functionally equivalent thereto, becomes “designated” when the employer adds the machine to the list required in paragraph (c) of this section. The designation is irrevocable, and the designated existing roadway maintenance machine remains subject to paragraph (b) of this section until it is retired or sold.

(e) If the ventilation system on a new on-track roadway maintenance machine or a designated existing on-track roadway maintenance machine of the type identified in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(5) of this section, or functionally equivalent thereto, becomes incapable of protecting an employee in the cab of the machine from exposure to air contaminants in accordance with 29 CFR 1910.1000, personal respiratory protective equipment shall be provided for each such employee until the machine is repaired in accordance with § 214.531.

(f) Personal respiratory protective equipment provided under paragraph (e) of this section shall comply with 29 CFR 1910.134.

(g) New on-track roadway maintenance machines with enclosed cabs, other than the types identified in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(5) of this section or functionally equivalent thereto, shall be equipped with operative heating and ventilation systems.

(h) When new on-track roadway maintenance machines require operation from non-enclosed stations outside of the main cab, the non-enclosed stations shall be equipped, where feasible from an engineering standpoint, with a permanent or temporary roof, canopy, or umbrella designed to provide cover from normal rainfall and midday sun.

(i) Paragraph (a) of this section is not applicable to machines that are incapable of performing work functions other than by remote operation and are equipped with no operating controls (i.e., remotely operated roadway maintenance machines) if the following conditions are met.

(1) If a remotely operated roadway maintenance machine is operated from the cab of a separate machine, that separate machine must comply with paragraph (a) of this section.

(2) If a remotely operated roadway maintenance machine is operated outside of the main cab of the separate machine in a manner that will expose the operator to air contaminants, as outlined in 29 CFR 1910.1000, the employee shall be protected in compliance with 29 CFR 1910.134.

(3) No person is permitted on the remotely operated roadway maintenance machine while the equipment is operating.

(4) Each remotely operated roadway maintenance machine must be clearly identified by stenciling, marking, or other written notice in a conspicuous location on the machine indicating the potential hazards of the machine being operated from a distance or that the machine may move automatically.

[68 FR 44407, July 28, 2003, as amended at 87 FR 15143, Mar. 17, 2022]

§ 214.507 Required safety equipment for new on-track roadway maintenance machines.

(a) Each new on-track roadway maintenance machine shall be equipped with:

(1) A seat for each operator, except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section;

(2) A safe and secure position with handholds, handrails, or a secure seat for each roadway worker transported on the machine. Each position shall be protected from moving parts of the machine;

(3) A positive method of securement for turntables, on machines equipped with a turntable, through engagement of pins and hooks that block the descent of turntable devices below the rail head when not in use;

(4) A windshield with safety glass, or other material with similar properties, if the machine is designed with a windshield. Each new on-track roadway maintenance machine designed with a windshield shall also have power windshield wipers or suitable alternatives that provide the machine operator an equivalent level of vision if windshield wipers are incompatible with the windshield material;

(5) A machine braking system capable of effectively controlling the movement of the machine under normal operating conditions;

(6) A first-aid kit that is readily accessible and complies with 29 CFR 1926.50(d)(2); and

(7) An operative and properly charged fire extinguisher of 5 BC rating or higher which is securely mounted and readily accessible to the operator from the operator's work station.

(b) Each new on-track roadway maintenance machine designed to be operated and transported by the operator in a standing position shall be equipped with handholds and handrails to provide the operator with a safe and secure position.

(c) Each new on-track roadway maintenance machine that weighs more than 32,500 pounds light weight and is operated in excess of 20 mph shall be equipped with a speed indicator that is accurate within ±5 mph of the actual speed at speeds of 10 mph and above.

(d) Each new on-track roadway maintenance machine shall have its as-built light weight displayed in a conspicuous location on the machine.

[68 FR 44407, July 28, 2003, as amended at 69 FR 8839, Feb. 26, 2004]

§ 214.509 Required visual illumination and reflective devices for new on-track roadway maintenance machines.

Each new on-track roadway maintenance machine shall be equipped with the following visual illumination and reflective devices:

(a) An illumination device, such as a headlight, capable of illuminating obstructions on the track ahead in the direction of travel for a distance of 300 feet under normal weather and atmospheric conditions;

(b) Work lights, if the machine is operated during the period between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise or in dark areas such as tunnels, unless equivalent lighting is otherwise provided;

(c) An operative 360-degree intermittent warning light or beacon mounted on the roof of the machine. New roadway maintenance machines that are not equipped with fixed roofs and have a light weight less than 17,500 pounds are exempt from this requirement;

(d) A brake light activated by the application of the machine braking system, and designed to be visible for a distance of 300 feet under normal weather and atmospheric conditions; and

(e) Rearward viewing devices, such as rearview mirrors.

§ 214.511 Required audible warning devices for new on-track roadway maintenance machines.

Each new on-track roadway maintenance machine shall be equipped with:

(a) A horn or other audible warning device that produces a sound loud enough to be heard by roadway workers and other machine operators within the immediate work area. The triggering mechanism for the device shall be clearly identifiable and within easy reach of the machine operator; and

(b) An automatic change-of-direction alarm which provides an audible signal that is at least three seconds long and is distinguishable from the surrounding noise. Change of direction alarms may be interrupted by the machine operator when operating the machine in the work mode if the function of the machine would result in a constant, or almost constant, sounding of the device. In any action brought by FRA to enforce the change-of-direction alarm requirement, the employer shall have the burden of proving that use of the change-of-direction alarm in a particular work function would cause a constant, or almost constant, sounding of the device.

§ 214.513 Retrofitting of existing on-track roadway maintenance machines; general.

(a) Each existing on-track roadway maintenance machine shall have a safe and secure position with handholds, handrails, or a secure seat or bench position for each roadway worker transported on the machine. Each position shall be protected from moving parts of the machine.

(b) By March 28, 2005, each existing on-track roadway maintenance machine shall be equipped with a permanent or portable horn or other audible warning device that produces a sound loud enough to be heard by roadway workers and other machine operators within the immediate work area. The triggering mechanism for the device shall be clearly identifiable and within easy reach of the machine operator.

(c) By March 28, 2005, each existing on-track roadway maintenance machine shall be equipped with a permanent illumination device or a portable light that is securely placed and not hand-held. The illumination device or portable light shall be capable of illuminating obstructions on the track ahead for a distance of 300 feet under normal weather and atmospheric conditions when the machine is operated during the period between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise or in dark areas such as tunnels.

[68 FR 44407, July 28, 2003, as amended at 69 FR 8839, Feb. 26, 2004]

§ 214.515 Overhead covers for existing on-track roadway maintenance machines.

(a) For those existing on-track roadway maintenance machines either currently or previously equipped with overhead covers for the operator's position, defective covers shall be repaired, and missing covers shall be reinstalled, by March 28, 2005 and thereafter maintained in accordance with the provisions of § 214.531.

(b) For those existing on-track roadway maintenance machines that are not already equipped with overhead covers for the operator's position, the employer shall evaluate the feasibility of providing an overhead cover on such a machine if requested in writing by the operator assigned to operate the machine or by the operator's designated representative. The employer shall provide the operator a written response to each request within 60 days. When the employer finds the addition of an overhead cover is not feasible, the response shall include an explanation of the reasoning used by the employer to reach that conclusion.

(c) For purposes of this section, overhead covers shall provide the operator's position with cover from normal rainfall and midday sun.

§ 214.517 Retrofitting of existing on-track roadway maintenance machines manufactured on or after January 1, 1991.

In addition to meeting the requirements of § 214.513, after March 28, 2005 each existing on-track roadway maintenance machine manufactured on or after January 1, 1991, shall have the following:

(a) A change-of-direction alarm or rearview mirror or other rearward viewing device, if either device is feasible, given the machine's design, and if either device adds operational safety value, given the machine's function. In any action brought by FRA to enforce this requirement, the employer shall have the burden of proving that neither device is feasible or adds operational safety value, or both, given the machine's design or work function.

(b) An operative heater, when the machine is operated at an ambient temperature less than 50 degrees Fahrenheit and is equipped with, or has been equipped with, a heater installed by the manufacturer or the railroad.

(c) The light weight of the machine stenciled or otherwise clearly displayed on the machine, if the light weight is known.

(d) Reflective material, or a reflective device, or operable brake lights.

(e) Safety glass when its glass is normally replaced, except that replacement glass that is specifically intended for on-track roadway maintenance machines and is in the employer's inventory as of September 26, 2003 may be utilized until exhausted.

(f) A turntable restraint device, on machines equipped with a turntable, to prevent undesired lowering, or a warning light indicating that the turntable is not in the normal travel position.

[68 FR 44407, July 28, 2003, as amended at 69 FR 8839, Feb. 26, 2004]

§ 214.518 Safe and secure positions for riders.

On or after March 1, 2004, a roadway worker, other than the machine operator, is prohibited from riding on any on-track roadway maintenance machine unless a safe and secure position for each roadway worker on the machine is clearly identified by stenciling, marking, or other written notice.

[69 FR 8839, Feb. 26, 2004]

§ 214.519 Floors, decks, stairs, and ladders of on-track roadway maintenance machines.

Floors, decks, stairs, and ladders of on-track roadway maintenance machines shall be of appropriate design and maintained to provide secure access and footing, and shall be free of oil, grease, or any obstruction which creates a slipping, falling, or fire hazard.

§ 214.521 Flagging equipment for on-track roadway maintenance machines and hi-rail vehicles.

Each on-track roadway maintenance machine and hi-rail vehicle shall have on board a flagging kit that complies with the operating rules of the railroad if:

(a) The equipment is operated over trackage subject to a railroad operating rule requiring flagging; and

(b) (1) The equipment is not part of a roadway work group; or

(2) The equipment is the lead or trailing piece of equipment in a roadway work group operating under the same occupancy authority.

[69 FR 8839, Feb. 26, 2004]

§ 214.523 Hi-rail vehicles.

(a) The hi-rail gear of all hi-rail vehicles shall be inspected for safety at least annually and with no more than 14 months between inspections. Tram, wheel wear, and gage shall be measured and, if necessary, adjusted to allow the vehicle to be safely operated.

(b) Each employer shall keep records pertaining to compliance with paragraph (a) of this section. Records may be kept on forms provided by the employer or by electronic means. The employer shall retain the record of each inspection until the next required inspection is performed. The records shall be made available for inspection and copying during normal business hours by representatives of FRA and States participating under part 212 of this chapter. The records may be kept on the hi-rail vehicle or at a location designated by the employer.

(c) A new hi-rail vehicle shall be equipped with:

(1) An automatic change-of-direction alarm or backup alarm that provides an audible signal at least three seconds long and distinguishable from the surrounding noise; and

(2) An operable 360-degree intermittent warning light or beacon mounted on the outside of the vehicle.

(d) (1) The operator of a hi-rail vehicle shall check the vehicle for compliance with this subpart, prior to using the vehicle at the start of the operator's work shift.

(2) A non-complying condition that cannot be repaired immediately shall be tagged and dated in a manner prescribed by the employer and reported to the designated official.

(3) Non-complying automatic change-of-direction alarms, backup alarms, and 360-degree intermittent warning lights or beacons shall be repaired or replaced as soon as practicable within seven calendar days.

§ 214.525 Towing with on-track roadway maintenance machines or hi-rail vehicles.

(a) When used to tow pushcars or other maintenance-of-way equipment, each on-track roadway maintenance machine or hi-rail vehicle shall be equipped with a towing bar or other coupling device that provides a safe and secure attachment.

(b) An on-track roadway maintenance machine or hi-rail vehicle shall not be used to tow pushcars or other maintenance-of-way equipment if the towing would cause the machine or hi-rail vehicle to exceed the capabilities of its braking system. In determining the limit of the braking system, the employer must consider the track grade (slope), as well as the number and weight of pushcars or other equipment to be towed.

§ 214.527 On-track roadway maintenance machines; inspection for compliance and schedule for repairs.

(a) The operator of an on-track roadway maintenance machine shall check the machine components for compliance with this subpart, prior to using the machine at the start of the operator's work shift.

(b) Any non-complying condition that cannot be repaired immediately shall be tagged and dated in a manner prescribed by the employer and reported to the designated official.

(c) The operation of an on-track roadway maintenance machine with a non-complying condition shall be governed by the following requirements:

(1) An on-track roadway maintenance machine with headlights or work lights that are not in compliance may be operated for a period not exceeding 7 calendar days and only during the period between one-half hour before sunrise and one-half hour after sunset;

(2) A portable horn may be substituted for a non-complying or missing horn for a period not exceeding seven calendar days;

(3) A fire extinguisher readily available for use may temporarily replace a missing, defective or discharged fire extinguisher on a new on-track roadway maintenance machine for a period not exceeding 7 calendar days, pending the permanent replacement or repair of the missing, defective or used fire extinguisher;

(4) Non-complying automatic change-of-direction alarms, backup alarms, and 360-degree intermittent warning lights or beacons shall be repaired or replaced as soon as practicable within 7 calendar days; and

(5) A structurally defective or missing operator's seat shall be replaced or repaired within 24 hours or by the start of the machine's next tour of duty, whichever is later. The machine may be operated for the remainder of the operator's tour of duty if the defective or missing operator's seat does not prevent its safe operation.

§ 214.529 In-service failure of primary braking system.

(a) In the event of a total in-service failure of its primary braking system, an on-track roadway maintenance machine may be operated for the remainder of its tour of duty with the use of a secondary braking system or by coupling to another machine, if such operations may be done safely.

(b) If the total in-service failure of an on-track roadway maintenance machine's primary braking system occurs where other equipment is not available for coupling, the machine may, if it is safe to do so, travel to a clearance or repair point where it shall be placed out of service until repaired.

§ 214.531 Schedule of repairs; general.

Except as provided in §§ 214.527(c)(5), 214.529, and 214.533, an on-track roadway maintenance machine or hi-rail vehicle that does not meet all the requirements of this subpart shall be brought into compliance as soon as practicable within seven calendar days. If repairs are not made within seven calendar days, the on-track roadway maintenance machine or hi-rail vehicle shall be placed out of on-track service.

§ 214.533 Schedule of repairs subject to availability of parts.

(a) The employer shall order a part necessary to repair a non-complying condition on an on-track roadway maintenance machine or a hi-rail vehicle by the end of the next business day following the report of the defect.

(b) When the employer cannot repair a non-complying condition as required by § 214.531 because of the temporary unavailability of a necessary part, the employer shall repair the on-track roadway maintenance machine or hi-rail vehicle within seven calendar days after receiving the necessary part. The employer may continue to use the on-track roadway maintenance machine or hi-rail vehicle with a non-complying condition until receiving the necessary part(s) for repair, subject to the requirements of § 214.503. However, if a non-complying condition is not repaired within 30 days following the report of the defect, the employer shall remove the on-track roadway maintenance machine or hi-rail vehicle from on-track service until it is brought into compliance with this subpart.

(c) If the employer fails to order a part necessary to repair the reported non-complying condition, or if it fails to install an available part within the required seven calendar days, the on-track roadway maintenance machine or hi-rail vehicle shall be removed from on-track service until brought into compliance with this subpart.

(d) Each employer shall maintain records pertaining to compliance with this section. Records may be kept on forms provided by the employer or by electronic means. The employer shall retain each record for at least one year, and the records shall be made available for inspection and copying during normal business hours by representatives of FRA and States participating under part 212 of this chapter. The records may be kept on the on-track roadway maintenance machine or hi-rail vehicle or at a location designated by the employer.


PART 243—TRAINING, QUALIFICATION, AND OVERSIGHT FOR SAFETY-RELATED RAILROAD EMPLOYEES

Authority:49 U.S.C. 20103, 20107, 20131-20155, 20162, 20301-20306, 20701-20702, 21301-21304, 21311; 28 U.S.C. 2461 note; and 49 CFR 1.89.

Source:79 FR 66501, Nov. 7, 2014, unless otherwise noted.

Subpart A—General

§ 243.1 Purpose and scope.

(a) The purpose of this part is to ensure that any person employed by a railroad or a contractor of a railroad as a safety-related railroad employee is trained and qualified to comply with any relevant Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders, as well as any relevant railroad rules and procedures promulgated to implement those Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders.

(b) This part contains the general minimum training and qualification requirements for each category and subcategory of safety-related railroad employee, regardless of whether the employee is employed by a railroad or a contractor of a railroad. Contractors shall coordinate with railroads and comply with the contents of this part, including those aspects of training that are specific to the contracting railroad's rules and procedures.

(c) The requirements in this part do not exempt any other requirement in this chapter.

(d) Unless otherwise noted, this part augments other training and qualification requirements contained in this chapter.

(e) The requirements in this part do not address hazardous materials training of “hazmat employees” as defined in 49 CFR 171.8 as such training is required pursuant to 49 CFR part 172, subpart H.

§ 243.3 Application and responsibility for compliance.

(a) This part applies to all railroads, contractors of railroads, and training organizations or learning institutions that train safety-related railroad employees except:

(1) Railroads or contractors of railroads that operate only on track inside an installation that is not part of the general railroad system of transportation (i.e., plant railroads, as defined in § 243.5);

(2) Tourist, scenic, historic, or excursion operations that are not part of the general railroad system of transportation as defined in § 243.5; or

(3) Rapid transit operations in an urban area that are not connected to the general railroad system of transportation.

(b) Although the duties imposed by this part are generally stated in terms of the duty of a railroad, each person, including a contractor for a railroad, who performs any duty covered by this part, shall perform that duty in accordance with this part.

§ 243.5 Definitions.

As used in this part—

Administrator   means the Administrator of the Federal Railroad Administration or the Administrator's delegate.

Associate Administrator   means the Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety and Chief Safety Officer of the Federal Railroad Administration or that person's delegate as designated in writing.

Calendar year   means the period of time beginning on January 1 and ending on December 31 of each year.

Contractor   means a person under contract with a railroad, including, but not limited to, a prime contractor or a subcontractor.

Designated instructor   means a person designated as such by an employer, training organization, or learning institution, who has demonstrated, pursuant to the training program submitted by the employer, training organization, or learning institution, an adequate knowledge of the subject matter under instruction and, where applicable, has the necessary experience to effectively provide formal training of the subject matter.

Employer   means a railroad or a contractor of a railroad that employs at least one safety-related railroad employee.

Formal training   means training that has a structured and defined curriculum, and which provides an opportunity for training participants to have questions timely answered during the training or at a later date. In the context of this part, formal training may include, but is not limited to, classroom, computer-based, correspondence, on-the-job, simulator, or laboratory training.

Knowledge-based training   is a type of formal training that is not task-based and is intended to convey information required for a safety-related railroad employee to comply with Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders, as well as any relevant railroad rules and procedures promulgated to implement those Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders.

On-the-job training (OJT)   means job training that occurs in the workplace, i.e., the employee learns the job while doing the job.

Person   means an entity of any type covered under 1 U.S.C. 1, including, but not limited to, the following: A railroad; a manager, supervisor, official, or other employee or agent of a railroad; any owner, manufacturer, lessor, or lessee of railroad equipment, track, or facilities; any independent contractor providing goods or services to a railroad; and any employee of such owner, manufacturer, lessor, lessee, or independent contractor.

Plant railroad   means a plant or installation that owns or leases a locomotive, uses that locomotive to switch cars throughout the plant or installation, and is moving goods solely for use in the facility's own industrial processes. The plant or installation could include track immediately adjacent to the plant or installation if the plant railroad leases the track from the general system railroad and the lease provides for (and actual practice entails) the exclusive use of that trackage by the plant railroad and the general system railroad for purposes of moving only cars shipped to or from the plant. A plant or installation that operates a locomotive to switch or move cars for other entities, even if solely within the confines of the plant or installation, rather than for its own purposes or industrial processes, will not be considered a plant railroad because the performance of such activity makes the operation part of the general railroad system of transportation.

Qualified   means that a person has successfully completed all instruction, training, and examination programs required by both the employer and this part, and that the person, therefore, may reasonably be expected to proficiently perform his or her duties in compliance with all Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders.

Refresher training   means periodic retraining required by an employer for each safety-related railroad employee to remain qualified.

Safety-related duty   means either a safety-related task or a knowledge-based prohibition that a person meeting the definition of a safety-related railroad employee is required to comply with, when such duty is covered by any Federal railroad safety law, regulation, or order.

Safety-related railroad employee   means an individual who is engaged or compensated by an employer to:

(1) Perform work covered under the hours of service laws found at 49 U.S.C. 21101, et seq.;

(2) Perform work as an operating railroad employee who is not subject to the hours of service laws found at 49 U.S.C. 21101, et seq.;

(3) In the application of parts 213 and 214 of this chapter, inspect, install, repair, or maintain track, roadbed, and signal and communication systems, including a roadway worker or railroad bridge worker as defined in § 214.7 of this chapter;

(4) Inspect, repair, or maintain locomotives, passenger cars or freight cars;

(5) Inspect, repair, or maintain other railroad on-track equipment when such equipment is in a service that constitutes a train movement under part 232 of this chapter;

(6) Determine that an on-track roadway maintenance machine or hi-rail vehicle may be used in accordance with part 214, subpart D of this chapter, without repair of a non-complying condition;

(7) Directly instruct, mentor, inspect, or test, as a primary duty, any person while that other person is engaged in a safety-related task; or

(8) Directly supervise the performance of safety-related duties in connection with periodic oversight in accordance with § 243.205.

Safety-related task   means a task that a person meeting the definition of a safety-related railroad employee performs, when such task is covered by any Federal railroad safety law, regulation, or order.

Task-based training   means a type of formal training with a primary focus on teaching the skills necessary to perform specific tasks that require some degree of neuromuscular coordination.

Tourist, scenic, historic, or excursion operations that are not part of the general railroad system of transportation   means a tourist, scenic, historic, or excursion operation conducted only on track used exclusively for that purpose (i.e., there is no freight, intercity passenger, or commuter passenger railroad operation on the track).

§ 243.7 Penalties and consequences for noncompliance.

(a) A person who violates any requirement of this part, or causes the violation of any such requirement, is subject to a civil penalty of at least $1,086 and not more than $35,516 per violation, except that: Penalties may be assessed against individuals only for willful violations, and, where a grossly negligent violation or a pattern of repeated violations has created an imminent hazard of death or injury to persons, or has caused death or injury, a penalty not to exceed $142,063 per violation may be assessed. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. See FRA's website at www.fra.dot.gov for a statement of agency civil penalty policy.

(b) A person who violates any requirement of this part or causes the violation of any such requirement may be subject to disqualification from all safety-sensitive service in accordance with part 209 of this chapter.

(c) A person who knowingly and willfully falsifies a record or report required by this part may be subject to criminal penalties under 49 U.S.C. 21311.

[79 FR 66501, Nov. 7, 2014, as amended at 81 FR 43113, July 1, 2016; 82 FR 16135, Apr. 3, 2017; 83 FR 60750, Nov. 27, 2018; 84 FR 23737, May 23, 2019; 84 FR 37075, July 31, 2019; 86 FR 1760, Jan. 11, 2021; 86 FR 23256, May 3, 2021; 87 FR 15870, Mar. 21, 2022; 88 FR 1129, Jan. 6, 2023; 88 FR 89564, Dec. 28, 2023]

Subpart B—Program Components and Approval Process

§ 243.101 Employer program required.

(a) (1) Effective January 1, 2020, each Class I railroad, and each intercity or commuter passenger railroad conducting operations subject to this part with 400,000 total employee work hours annually or more, shall submit, adopt, and comply with a training program for its safety-related railroad employees.

(2) Effective May 1, 2021, each employer conducting operations subject to this part not covered by paragraph (a)(1) of this section shall submit, adopt, and comply with a training program for its safety-related railroad employees.

(b) Except for an employer subject to the requirement in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, an employer commencing operations subject to this part after January 1, 2020, shall submit a training program for its safety-related railroad employees before commencing operations. Upon commencing operations, the employer shall adopt and comply with the training program.

(c) In the program required by this part, the employer shall:

(1) Classify its safety-related railroad employees in occupational categories or subcategories by craft, class, task, or other suitable terminology;

(2) Define the occupational categories or subcategories of safety-related railroad employees. The definition of each category or subcategory shall include a list of the Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders that the employee is required to comply with, based on the employee's assignments and duties, broken down at a minimum to the applicable part of the Code of Federal Regulations, section of the United States Code, or citation to an order. The listing of the Federal requirements shall contain the descriptive title of each law, regulation, or order;

(3) Create tables or utilize other suitable formats which summarize the information required in paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) of this section, segregated by major railroad departments (e.g., Operations, Maintenance of Way, Maintenance of Equipment, Signal and Communications). After listing the major departments, the tables or other formats should list the categories and subcategories of safety-related railroad employees within those departments;

(4) Develop procedures to design and develop key learning points for any task-based or knowledge-based training; and

(5) Determine how training shall be structured, developed, and delivered, including an appropriate combination of classroom, simulator, computer-based, correspondence, OJT, or other formal training. The curriculum shall be designed to impart knowledge of, and ability to comply with applicable Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders, as well as any relevant railroad rules and procedures promulgated to implement those applicable Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders.

(d) On-the-job (OJT) training requirements:

(1) If a training program has OJT, the OJT portion of the training program shall consist of the following three key components:

(i) A brief statement describing the tasks and related steps the employee learning the job shall be able to perform;

(ii) A statement of the conditions (prerequisites, tools, equipment, documentation, briefings, demonstrations, and practice) necessary for learning transfer; and

(iii) A statement of the standards by which proficiency is measured through a combination of task/step accuracy, completeness, and repetition.

(2) Prior to beginning the initial safety-related tasks associated with OJT exercises, employers shall make any relevant information or materials, such as operating rules, safety rules, or other rules available to employees involved for referencing.

(3) The tasks and related steps associated with OJT exercises for a particular category or subcategory of employee shall be maintained together in one manual, checklist, or similar document. This reference shall be made available to all employees involved in those OJT exercises.

(e) Contractor's responsibility to validate approved program to a railroad: A contractor that chooses to train its own safety-related railroad employees shall provide each railroad that utilizes it with a document indicating that the contractor's program of training was approved by FRA. A contractor is being utilized by a railroad when any of the contractor's employees conduct safety-related duties on behalf of the railroad and the railroad does not otherwise qualify those employees of the contractor that are allowed to perform those duties.

(f) Railroad's responsibility to retain contractor's validation of program: A railroad that chooses to utilize contractor employees to perform safety-related duties and relies on contractor-provided training as the basis for those employees' qualification to perform those duties shall retain a document from the contractor indicating that the contractor's program was approved by FRA. A copy of the document required in paragraph (e) of this section satisfies this requirement.

[79 FR 66501, Nov. 7, 2014, as amended at 82 FR 20552, May 3, 2017; 83 FR 18458, Apr. 27, 2018; 85 FR 13, Jan. 2, 2020]

§ 243.103 Training components identified in program.

(a) Each employer's program shall include the following components:

(1) A unique name and identifier for each formal course of study;

(2) A course outline for each course that includes the following:

(i) Any prerequisites to course attendance;

(ii) A brief description of the course, including the terminal learning objectives;

(iii) A brief description of the target audience, e.g., a list of the occupational categories and subcategories of employees the course will be delivered to;

(iv) The method(s) of course delivery, which may include, but are not limited to, classroom, computer-based, on-the-job, simulator, laboratory, correspondence courses, or any combination thereof;

(v) The anticipated course duration;

(vi) A syllabus of the course to include any applicable U.S.C. chapters, 49 CFR parts, or FRA orders covered in the training; and

(vii) The kind of assessment (written test, performance test, verbal test, OJT standard, etc.) performed to demonstrate employee competency.

(3) A document for each OJT program component that includes the following:

(i) The roles and responsibilities of each category of person involved in the administration and implementation, guidelines for program coordination, and the progression and application of the OJT;

(ii) A listing of the occupational categories and subcategories of employees for which the OJT program applies; and

(iii) Details of the safety-related tasks and subtasks, conditions, and standards covered by the program components.

(4) The job title and telephone number of the employer's primary training point(s) of contact, listed separately by major department or employee occupational category, if applicable.

(5) If any training organization or learning institution developed and will deliver all or any part of the training, the employer must include the following:

(i) A narrative, text table, or other suitable format which describes those portions of the training that fit into this category;

(ii) The business name of the organization that developed and will deliver the training; and

(iii) The job title and telephone number of the training organization or learning institution's primary training point of contact.

(b) An employer that is required to submit similar training programs or plans pursuant to other regulatory requirements contained elsewhere in this chapter may elect to cross-reference these other programs or plans in the program required by this part rather than resubmitting that similar program or plan. When any such similar program or plan did not include the OJT components specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, the employer shall supplement its program in accordance with this part by providing that additional information.

(c) If an employer arranges job-related practice and practice related feedback sessions to supplement classroom, laboratory, simulator training, or OJT, the program shall include a description of the supplemental training.

(d) FRA may require modifications to any programs, including those programs referenced in paragraph (b) of this section, if it determines essential program components, such as OJT, or arranged practice and feedback, are missing or inadequate.

§ 243.105 Optional model program development.

(a) Any organization, business, or association may develop and submit one or more model training programs to FRA for review and approval so that the model program(s) may be used by multiple employers.

(1) Any such model program should be submitted with a unique identifier associated with the program, or FRA will assign a unique identifier.

(2) The program associated with the organization's unique identifier shall include all information required by § 243.103.

(3) Each model training program submitted to FRA before May 1, 2019, is considered approved and may be implemented 180 days after the date of submission unless the Associate Administrator advises the organization, business, or association that developed and submitted the program that all or part of the program does not conform.

(b) An employer that chooses to use a model program approved by FRA is not required to submit the entire program to FRA. Instead, the employer must submit only the unique identifier, and all other information that is specific to that employer or deviates from the model program.

[79 FR 66501, Nov. 7, 2014, as amended at 82 FR 20552, May 3, 2017; 83 FR 18458, Apr. 27, 2018]

§ 243.107 Training program submission, introductory information required.

(a) An employer who provides or is responsible for the training of safety-related railroad employees shall submit its training program to FRA for review and approval. Each employer shall state in its submission whether, at the time of filing, it:

(1) Primarily conducts the training program of its own safety-related railroad employees, utilizing its own resources;

(2) Conducts any training for other than its own safety-related railroad employees;

(3) Implements any training programs conducted by some other entity on its behalf but adopted by that employer;

(4) Qualifies safety-related railroad employees previously qualified by other employers;

(5) Qualifies safety-related railroad employees previously trained by training organizations or learning institutions; or

(6) Any combination of paragraph (a)(1) through (5) of this section.

(b) An employer who utilizes any of the options specified in paragraphs (a)(2) through (5) of this section shall provide the following information in its submission:

(1) The categories of safety-related railroad employees who, at the time of filing, will receive training utilizing one or more of these options; and

(2) Whether the training delivered, utilizing one or more of these options, composes all or part of the overall training program regimen for that category of employee at the time of filing.

(c) An employer that elects to use training organizations or learning institutions to train some or all of its safety-related railroad employees, or to hire new safety-related railroad employees that have previously received training from any training organizations or learning institutions, shall include the full name of the training organization or learning institution in its submission.

§ 243.109 Training program submission, review, and approval process.

(a) Initial programs. (1) Apprenticeship or similar intern programs, that began prior to submission of the employer's initial program filed in accordance with this part, shall be described in the employer's initial program. Any such apprenticeship or similar intern programs may continue, but if the Associate Administrator advises the employer of specific deficiencies, the employer shall resubmit that portion of its program, as revised to address specific deficiencies, within 90 days after the date of any notice of deficiencies from the Associate Administrator. A failure to resubmit the program with the necessary revisions shall be considered a failure to implement a program under this part. The Associate Administrator may extend this 90-day period upon written request.

(2) An employer's initial program, as required by § 243.101(a) or (b), must be submitted to the Associate Administrator and is considered approved, and may be implemented immediately upon submission. Following submission, the Associate Administrator will review the program and inform the employer as to whether the initial program conforms to this part. If the Associate Administrator determines that all or part of the program does not conform, the Associate Administrator will inform the employer of the specific deficiencies. The deficient portions of the non-conforming program may remain in effect until approval of the revised program, unless FRA provides notification otherwise. An employer shall resubmit the portion of its program, as revised to address specific deficiencies, within 90 days after the date of any notice of deficiencies from the Associate Administrator. A failure to resubmit the program with the necessary revisions shall be considered a failure to implement a program under this part. The Associate Administrator may extend this 90-day period upon written request.

(b) Previously approved programs require an informational filing when modified.  The employer must review its previously approved training program and modify it accordingly when new safety-related Federal railroad laws, regulations, or orders are issued, or new safety-related technologies, procedures, or equipment are introduced into the workplace and result in new knowledge requirements, safety-related tasks, or modification of existing safety-related duties. An employer that modifies its training program for these described reasons shall submit an informational filing to the Associate Administrator not later than 30 days after the end of the calendar year in which the modification occurred, unless FRA advises otherwise to individual employers, one or more group of employers, or the general public. Programs modified in accordance with this paragraph, after the initial FRA approval, are considered approved upon being modified and may be implemented immediately. Any program deficiencies noted by the Associate Administrator shall be addressed in the same manner as paragraph (a)(2) of this section. The filing shall contain a summary description of sufficient detail that FRA can associate the changes with the employer's previously approved program, and shall include:

(1) Descriptions of all new or refresher training courses developed since the previous FRA approval, using the same criteria required for an initial filing;

(2) Explanations whenever OJT or arranged practice is added to, or discontinued from, a program;

(3) Explanations as to how the methods of delivering training, or qualifying employees has changed; and

(4) A statement from an organization, business, or association that has submitted a model program pursuant to this part, that the organization, business, or association has informed each employer who requested the right to use the affected training program of the changes and the need for the employer to comply with those changes that apply to the employer's operation.

(c) New portions or revisions to an approved program.  Substantial additions or revisions to a previously approved program, that are not described as informational filings in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section, shall be considered approved and may be implemented immediately upon submission. Following submission, the Associate Administrator will review the new portions or revisions to the previously approved program and inform the employer as to whether the modifications conform to this part. Any program deficiencies noted by the Associate Administrator shall be addressed in the same manner as paragraph (a)(2) of this section. The Associate Administrator will inform the employer as to whether a new portion or revision to an approved program conforms to this part. If the Associate Administrator has determined that the changes do not conform to this part, the employer shall resubmit the portion of its program, as revised to address specific deficiencies, within 90 days after the date of any notice of deficiencies from the Associate Administrator. Failure to resubmit the program with the necessary revisions shall be considered a failure to implement a program under this part. The Associate Administrator may extend this 90-day period upon written request.

(d) Additional submission, resubmission, or informational filing requirement for railroads. (1) Each railroad shall:

(i) Simultaneous with its filing with the FRA, serve a copy of any submission, resubmission, or informational filing required pursuant to this section, to the president of each labor organization that represents the railroad's employees subject to this part; and

(ii) Include in its submission, resubmission, or informational filing required pursuant to this section a statement affirming that the railroad has served a copy to the president of each labor organization that represents the railroad's employees subject to this part, together with a list of the names and addresses of persons served.

(2) Not later than 90 days from the date a railroad files its submission, resubmission, or informational filing required pursuant to this section, a representative designated by the president of each labor organization that represents railroad employees subject to this part, may file a comment on the submission, resubmission, or informational filing:

(i) Each comment shall be submitted to the Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety/Chief Safety Officer, Federal Railroad Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590; and

(ii) The commenter shall certify that a copy of the comment was served on the railroad.

§ 243.111 Approval of programs filed by training organizations or learning institutions.

(a) A training organization or learning institution that provides training services for safety-related railroad employees, including providing such training services to independent students who enroll with such training organization or learning institution and who will rely on the training services provided to qualify to become safety-related railroad employees, must submit its program to FRA for review and approval.

(b) A training organization or learning institution that has provided training services to employers covered by this part before January 1, 2019, may continue to offer such training services without FRA approval until January 1, 2020. The Associate Administrator may extend this period at any time based on a written request. Such written requests for an extension of time to submit a program should contain any factors the training organization or learning institution wants the Associate Administrator to consider before approving or disapproving the extension.

(c) A program submitted by a training organization or learning institution must include all information required for an employer's program in accordance with this part, unless the requirement could only apply to an employer's program. The submitted program for a training organization or learning institution must also include the following information:

(1) The full corporate or business name of the training organization or learning institution;

(2) The training organization or learning institution's primary business and email address;

(3) The training organization or learning institution's primary telephone number and point of contact;

(4) A listing of the training organization or learning institution's designated instructors;

(5) A resume for each designated instructor, showing how the instructor achieved the subject-matter and training expertise necessary to develop and deliver training to safety-related railroad employees, unless the designated instructors are currently employed by a railroad;

(6) A list of references of employer customers the learning organization or training institution has provided services to in the past; and

(7) A brief summary statement indicating how the training organization or learning institution determined the knowledge, skills, and abilities necessary to develop the training courses it provides to employers and independent students who enroll with such training organization or learning institution in order to become safety-related railroad employees. This brief summary should be of sufficient detail so that FRA can ascertain the methodologies the training organization or learning institution used during training development.

(d) Except as specified in paragraph (b) of this section, prior approval by the Associate Administrator is required before FRA will accept such training as sufficient to meet the requirements of this part. The Associate Administrator will advise the training organization or learning institution in writing whether FRA has approved the program. If all or part of the program is not approved by FRA, the Associate Administrator will inform the training organization or learning institution of specific deficiencies. At the time that the Associate Administrator informs of any deficiencies, the Associate Administrator will clarify whether any particular training courses shall be considered approved.

(e) Previously approved programs require an informational filing when modified. The training organization or learning institution shall review its previously approved training program and modify it accordingly when new safety-related Federal railroad laws, regulations, or orders are issued, or new safety-related technologies, procedures, or equipment are introduced into the workplace and result in new knowledge requirements, safety-related tasks, or in modifications of existing safety-related duties. A training organization or learning institution that modifies its training program for these described reasons shall submit an informational filing to the Associate Administrator not later than 30 days after the end of the calendar year in which the modification occurred, unless FRA advises otherwise. Programs modified in accordance with this paragraph are considered approved upon modification and may be implemented immediately. Any program deficiencies noted by the Associate Administrator shall be addressed as specified in this section. The filing shall contain a summary description of sufficient detail so that FRA can associate the changes with the training organization's or learning institution's previously approved program, and shall include:

(1) Descriptions of all new or refresher training courses developed after the previous FRA approval, using the same criteria required for an initial filing;

(2) Explanations whenever OJT or arranged practice is added to, or discontinued from, a program; and

(3) Explanations as to how the methods of delivering training, or qualifying employees has changed.

(f) New portions or revisions to an approved program: Substantial additions or revisions to a previously approved program, that are not described as informational filings in accordance with paragraph (e) of this section, shall require prior approval by the Associate Administrator before FRA will accept such training as sufficient to meet the requirements of this part. The Associate Administrator will advise the training organization or learning institution in writing whether FRA has approved the new or revised program. If all or part of the program is not approved by FRA, the Associate Administrator will inform the training organization or learning institution of specific deficiencies. At the time that the Associate Administrator informs the training organization or learning institution of any deficiencies, the Associate Administrator will clarify whether any particular new or revised training courses shall be considered approved.

(g) Training organizations and learning institutions subject to this part are required to maintain records for each safety-related railroad employee that attends the training, in accordance with the recordkeeping requirements of this part.

(h) Training organizations and learning institutions subject to this part shall provide a student's training transcript or training record to any employer upon request by the student.

[79 FR 66501, Nov. 7, 2014, as amended at 82 FR 20553, May 3, 2017; 83 FR 18459, Apr. 27, 2018]

§ 243.113 Electronic and written program submission requirements.

(a) Except for an employer with less than 400,000 total employee work hours annually, each employer, training organization, or learning institution to which this part applies is required to file by electronic means any program submissions required under this part in accordance with the requirements of this section. Each organization, business, or association that develops an optional model program in accordance with § 243.105 of this part is required to electronically file the program in accordance with the requirements of this section.

(b) Prior to any person's first program submission electronically, the person shall provide the Associate Administrator with the following information in writing:

(1) The name of the employer, organization, learning institution, business, or association;

(2) The names of two individuals, including job titles, who will be the person's points of contact and will be the only individuals allowed access to FRA's secure document submission site;

(3) The mailing addresses for the person's points of contact;

(4) The person's system or main headquarters address located in the United States;

(5) The email addresses for the person's points of contact; and

(6) The daytime telephone numbers for the person's points of contact.

(c) A person that electronically submits an initial program, informational filing, or new portions or revisions to an approved program required by this part shall be considered to have provided its consent to receive approval or disapproval notices from FRA by email.

(d) A request for FRA review of written materials shall be addressed to the Associate Administrator for Railroad Safety/Chief Safety Officer, Federal Railroad Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590.

(e) FRA may electronically store any materials required by this part regardless of whether the person that submits the materials does so by delivering the written materials to the Associate Administrator and opts not to submit the materials electronically.

(f) A person that opts not to submit the materials required by this part electronically, but provides one or more email addresses in its submission, shall be considered to have provided consent to receive approval or disapproval notices from FRA by email or mail.

Subpart C—Program Implementation and Oversight Requirements

§ 243.201 Employee qualification requirements.

(a) Designating existing employees:

(1) By no later than September 1, 2020, each Class I railroad, and each intercity or commuter passenger railroad conducting operations subject to this part with 400,000 total employee work hours annually or more in operation as of January 1, 2020, shall declare the designation of each of its existing safety-related railroad employees by occupational category or subcategory, and only permit designated employees to perform safety-related service in that occupational category or subcategory. The Associate Administrator may extend this period based on a written request.

(2) By no later than January 1, 2022, each employer conducting operations subject to this part not covered by paragraph (a)(1) of this section in operation as of January 1, 2021, shall declare the designation of each of its existing safety-related railroad employees by occupational category or subcategory, and only permit designated employees to perform safety-related service in that occupational category or subcategory. The Associate Administrator may extend this period based on a written request.

(b) Except for an employer subject to the requirement in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, an employer commencing operations after January 1, 2020, shall declare the designation of each of its existing safety-related railroad employees by occupational category or subcategory before beginning operations, and only permit designated employees to perform safety-related service in that category or subcategory. Any person designated shall have met the requirements for newly hired employees or those assigned new safety-related duties in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section.

(c) Newly hired employees or those assigned new safety-related duty:. The following requirements apply to qualifying a safety-related railroad employee who, subsequent to the employer's designation in accordance with paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, is newly hired or is to engage in a safety-related task not associated with the employee's previous training.

(1) Prior to an employee becoming a qualified member of an occupational category or subcategory, the employer shall require a safety-related railroad employee who is newly hired or is to engage in safety-related duties not associated with the employee's previous training to successfully complete the formal training curriculum for that category or subcategory of safety-related railroad employee. Successful completion of the formal training curriculum includes passing any required examinations covering the skills and knowledge the employee will need to possess in order to perform the safety-related duties necessary to be a member of the occupational category or subcategory.

(2) If the training curriculum includes OJT, the employee shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of a designated instructor, OJT proficiency by successfully completing the safety-related tasks necessary to become a qualified member of the occupational category or subcategory. However, as part of the OJT process and prior to completing such training and passing the field evaluation, a person may perform such tasks under the direct onsite observation of any qualified person, provided the qualified person has been advised of the circumstances and is capable of intervening if an unsafe act or non-compliance with Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, or orders is observed. An employee designated to provide formal training to other employees, and who is not a designated instructor, shall be qualified on the safety-related topics or tasks in accordance with the employer's training program and the requirements of this part.

(d) Employees previously qualified or trained, but not by the current employer: If an employee has received relevant qualification or training for a particular occupational category or subcategory through participation in a FRA-approved training program submitted by an entity other than the employee's current employer, that training shall satisfy the requirements of this part:

(1) Provided that:

(i) A current record of training is obtained from that other entity; or

(ii) When a current record of training is unavailable from that other entity, an employer performs testing to ensure the employee has the knowledge necessary to be a member of that category or subcategory of safety-related railroad employee; and

(2) When the employee, in the previous 180 days, has either not performed the safety-related duties or not received initial or periodic training for an occupational category or subcategory, the employer shall perform testing to ensure the employee has retained the knowledge necessary to remain a member of that occupational category or subcategory. In the situation where an employee's records are unavailable and the employee is subject to testing under paragraph (d)(1)(ii) of this section, no additional testing is required.

(e) Refresher training requirements and options:

(1) Beginning January 1, 2022, each Class I railroad, and each intercity or commuter passenger railroad conducting operations subject to this part with 400,000 total employee work hours annually or more, shall deliver refresher training at an interval not to exceed 3 calendar years from the date of an employee's last training event, except where refresher training is specifically required more frequently in accordance with this chapter. If the last training event occurs before FRA's approval of the employer's training program, the employer shall provide refresher training either within 3 calendar years from that prior training event or no later than December 31, 2024. Each employer shall ensure that, as part of each employee's refresher training, the employee is trained and qualified on the application of any Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders the person is required to comply with, as well as any relevant railroad rules and procedures promulgated to implement those Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders.

(2) Beginning May 1, 2023, each employer conducting operations subject to this part not covered by paragraph (e)(1) of this section shall deliver refresher training at an interval not to exceed 3 calendar years from the date of an employee's last training event, except where refresher training is specifically required more frequently in accordance with this chapter. If the last training event occurs before FRA's approval of the employer's training program, the employer shall provide refresher training either within 3 calendar years from that prior training event or no later than December 31, 2025. Each employer shall ensure that, as part of each employee's refresher training, the employee is trained and qualified on the application of any Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders the person is required to comply with, as well as any relevant railroad rules and procedures promulgated to implement those Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders.

[79 FR 66501, Nov. 7, 2014, as amended at 82 FR 20553, May 3, 2017; 83 FR 18459, Apr. 27, 2018; 85 FR 13, Jan. 2, 2020]

§ 243.203 Records.

(a) General requirements for qualification status records; accessibility.  Each employer shall maintain records to demonstrate the qualification status of each safety-related railroad employee that it employs.

(1) The records for former safety-related railroad employees shall be accessible for 6 years at the employer's system headquarters after the employment relationship ends.

(2) Current employee records shall be accessible at the employer's system headquarters.

(b) Employee information.  The records shall include the following information concerning each such employee:

(1) The name of the employee;

(2) Occupational category or subcategory designations for which the employee is deemed qualified;

(3) The dates that each formal training course was completed;

(4) The title of each formal training course successfully completed;

(5) If the safety-related railroad employee attended safety-related training offered by a business, a training organization, or a learning institution with an FRA-approved program, a copy of the transcript or appropriate record from that business, training organization, or learning institution;

(6) The employee's OJT performance, which shall include the unique name or identifier of the OJT program component in accordance with § 243.103, the date the OJT program component was successfully completed, and the identification of the person(s) determining that the employee successfully completed all OJT training necessary to be considered qualified to perform the safety-related tasks identified with the occupational categories or subcategories for which the employee is designated in accordance with the program required by this part;

(7) The date that the employee's status is determined to be qualified and the employee is designated to perform the safety-related duties identified with any particular occupational categories or subcategories, in accordance with the program required by this part;

(8) If an employee's qualification status was transferred from another entity with an approved program, a copy of the training record from that other entity; and

(9) Any additional information required by this part.

(c) Record accessibility for other than individual employee records.  Except for records demonstrating the qualification status of each safety-related railroad employee as described in paragraph (b) of this section or otherwise specified in this part, each test, inspection, annual review, or other event record required by this part shall be accessible for 3 calendar years after the end of the calendar year to which the event relates. Each employer shall make these records accessible at one headquarters location within the United States, including, but not limited to, a railroad's system headquarters, a holding company's headquarters, a joint venture's headquarters, a contractor's principal place of business or other headquarters located where the contractor is incorporated. This requirement does not prohibit an employer with divisions from also maintaining any of these records at any division headquarters.

(d) Availability of records.  Each employer, training organization, or learning institution required to maintain records under this part shall:

(1) Make all records available for inspection and copying/photocopying to representatives of FRA, upon request during normal business hours; and

(2) Make an employee's records available for inspection and copying/photocopying to that employee, former employee, or such person's representative upon written authorization by such employee during normal business hours.

(e) Electronic recordkeeping.  Nothing in this section precludes an employer, a training organization, or a learning institution from maintaining the information required to be retained under this part in an electronic format provided that:

(1) The employer, training organization, or learning institution maintains an information technology security program adequate to ensure the integrity of the electronic data storage system, including the prevention of unauthorized access to the program logic or individual records;

(2) The program and data storage system must be protected by a security system that utilizes an employee identification number and password, or a comparable method, to establish appropriate levels of program access meeting all of the following standards:

(i) No two individuals have the same electronic identity; and

(ii) A record cannot be deleted or altered by any individual after the record is certified by the employee who created the record;

(3) Any amendment to a record is either:

(i) Electronically stored apart from the record that it amends; or

(ii) Electronically attached to the record as information without changing the original record;

(4) Each amendment to a record uniquely identifies the person making the amendment;

(5) The system employed by the employer, training organization, or learning institution for data storage permits reasonable access and retrieval of the information in usable format when requested to furnish data by FRA representatives; and

(6) Information retrieved from the system can be easily produced in a printed format which can be readily provided to FRA representatives in a timely manner and authenticated by a designated representative of the railroad as a true and accurate copy of the railroad's records if requested to do so by FRA representatives.

(f) Transfer of records.  If an employer ceases to do business and its assets will be transferred to a successor employer, it shall transfer to the successor employer all records required to be maintained under this part, and the successor employer shall retain them for the remainder of the period prescribed in this part.

§ 243.205 Periodic oversight.

(a) General.  As part of the program required in accordance with this part, an employer shall adopt and comply with a program to conduct periodic oversight tests and inspections to determine if safety-related railroad employees comply with Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders particular to FRA-regulated personal and work group safety. The program of periodic oversight shall commence on the day the employer files its program with FRA pursuant to § 243.101(a) or on the day the employer commences operations pursuant to § 243.101(b). The data gathered through the testing and inspection components of the program shall be used to determine whether systemic performance gaps exist, and to determine if modifications to the training component of the program are appropriate to close those gaps.

(b) Locomotive engineer and conductor oversight exception.  Periodic oversight specified in this section is not required for employees covered by parts 240 and 242 of this chapter, but a railroad shall use results of the assessments required by those parts to determine if changes in its training programs are necessary to close any proficiency gaps found during those assessments.

(c) Railroad oversight.  Each railroad shall identify supervisory employees, by category or subcategory, responsible for conducting periodic oversight tests and inspections for the safety-related railroad employees that it authorizes to perform safety-related duties on its property, except a railroad is not required to:

(1) Provide oversight for a contractor's safety-related railroad employees if that contractor is required to conduct its own periodic oversight because it meets the criteria specified in paragraph (g) of this section;

(2) Provide oversight for categories or subcategories of a contractor's safety-related railroad employees if the railroad does not employ supervisory employees who are qualified as safety-related railroad employees in those categories or subcategories; or

(3) Provide oversight for any supervisory employee identified by the railroad as responsible for conducting oversight in accordance with this section.

(d) Operational test exception for a railroad.  A railroad is not required to perform operational tests of safety-related railroad employees employed by a contractor.

(e) Railroad oversight for contractors.  A railroad may choose to require supervisory employees to perform oversight of safety-related railroad employees employed by a contractor either:

(1) When oversight test and inspection sessions are scheduled specifically to determine if safety-related employees are in compliance with Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders particular to FRA-regulated personal and work group safety; or

(2) When a qualified railroad supervisory employee's duties place this person in the vicinity of one or more safety-related railroad employees employed by a contractor and performing the oversight would result in minimal disruption of this person's other assigned duties.

(f) Railroad's duty to notify contractor of non-compliance.  A railroad that finds evidence of contractor employee non-compliance with Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders particular to FRA-regulated personal and work group safety during the periodic oversight shall provide that employee and that employee's employer with details of the non-compliance.

(g) Contractor oversight.  Each contractor shall conduct periodic oversight tests and inspections of its safety-related railroad employees provided:

(1) A contractor employs more than 15 safety-related railroad employees;

(2) A contractor relies on training it directly provides to its own employees as the basis for qualifying those employees to perform safety-related duties on a railroad; and

(3) A contractor employs supervisory safety-related railroad employees capable of performing oversight.

(h) Oversight divided by agreement.  Notwithstanding the requirements of paragraphs (c) and (g) of this section, a railroad and a contractor may agree that the contractor will provide the oversight by specifying in the program that the railroad has trained the contractor employees responsible for training and oversight.

(i) Detailed records required.  Each employer that conducts periodic oversight in accordance with this section must keep a record of the date, time, place, and result of each test or inspection. The records shall specify each person administering tests and inspections, and each person tested. The record shall also provide a method to record whether the employee complied with the monitored duties, and any interventions used to remediate non-compliance. Modifications of the program required by § 217.9 of this chapter may be used in lieu of this oversight program, provided a railroad specifies it has done so in its program submitted in accordance with this part.

(j) Additional records requirement.  Records required under this section are subject to the requirements of § 243.203.

§ 243.207 Annual review.

(a) The purpose of this review is to determine if knowledge or performance gaps exist in the application of Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders. This section shall apply to each railroad once a program has been approved by FRA in accordance with this part. This section does not apply to a railroad with less than 400,000 total employee work hours annually. This section does not apply to employers other than railroads except as specified in paragraph (f) of this section.

(b) Except as provided for in paragraph (a) of this section, each railroad that is required to conduct periodic oversight in accordance with § 243.205 is also required to conduct an annual review, as provided in this section, and shall retain, at its system headquarters, one copy of the written annual review.

(c) Each railroad shall designate a person(s) who shall conduct a written annual review. The annual review shall be designed to identify knowledge or performance gaps in occupational categories and determine whether adjustments to the training component of the program are the appropriate intervention to close those gaps or otherwise improve the effectiveness of the program. Such review shall include analysis of the following data:

(1) Periodic oversight data required by § 243.205;

(2) Reportable accident/incident data as defined in part 225 of this chapter;

(3) FRA inspection report data;

(4) Employee training feedback received through a course evaluation process, if such feedback is available; and

(5) Feedback received from labor representatives, if such feedback is available.

(d) Based upon the results of the annual review, the designated person(s) shall coordinate any necessary adjustments to the initial and refresher training programs. At the railroad's option, the annual review required under this section may be conducted in conjunction with any periodic review required under part 217 of this chapter.

(e) If a railroad utilizes a contractor that directly trains its own safety-related railroad employees, the railroad shall notify the contractor of the relevant training program adjustments made to the railroad's program in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section.

(f) A contractor shall use any information provided by a railroad to adjust its training specific to the Federal railroad safety laws, regulations, and orders particular to FRA-regulated personal and work group safety.

(g) Prior to September 1 of each calendar year, each railroad to which this section applies shall complete its annual review for the previous calendar year.

§ 243.209 Railroad maintained list of contractors utilized.

(a) Each railroad utilizing contractors to supply the railroad with safety-related railroad employees shall maintain a list, at its system headquarters, with information regarding each contractor utilized unless:

(1) The railroad qualifies each of the contractor's safety-related railroad employees utilized; and

(2) The railroad maintains the training records for each of the contractor's safety-related railroad employees utilized.

(b) The listing required by paragraph (a) of this section shall include:

(1) The full corporate or business name of the contractor;

(2) The contractor's primary business and email address; and

(3) The contractor's primary telephone number.

(c) The information required by this section shall be continuously updated as additional contractors are utilized, and no contractor information shall be deleted from the list unless the contractor has not been utilized for at least 3 years from the end of the calendar year the contractor was last utilized.